



> "Democracies have not eradicated oligarchy, they have driven it to secrecy, a state of affairs ironically most abhorrent in a democracy. Instead of confronting the problems inherent in an oligarchy, democracy denies it exists while practicing it openly. Oligarchy is not necessary, but it can only be overcome in a completely open and transparent system which allows the most widespread participation by all and knowledge for all and recognizes and accommodates expertise and greater levels of knowledge." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "When a round peg does not fit in a square hole despite numerous attempts we do not say it has not been tried, we say it doesn’t work." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "Representative democracies do not provide for expertise in governance as representatives are elected by land mass and time span, not system, and are usually elected for charisma, not expertise. Athenian sortition likewise made no attempt at combining expertise with authority. Subjects that the majority is unqualified to speak on are delegated to similarly unqualified political representatives, segregated from other representatives by land mass. These representatives appoint experts who obtain their positions by cronyism with the politician instead of expertise acknowledged by the entire interested population.
>
> The politicians and experts in the current system then provide for no meaningful feedback from users of the system, outside of occasional polls. These polls are conducted on test populations which another group have decided shall be considered representative of the population as a whole and used to provide input on only the questions the experts decide. There is no transparency of any meaningful kind that would allow users of the system to audit what the experts were doing.
>
> We can do better than this. We can govern by user groups, respect individual rights and global commons, and collaborate using stigmergy. We can belong to overlapping societies voluntarily by acceptance of social contracts. Where necessary, elite expertise can be contained and used through transparent epistemic communities with knowledge bridges while control remains with the user group." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "The first goal of nation states is to defend their citizens against the ‘other’, an idea which has led, and will continue to lead, to divisive politics and human rights violations." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "Group representation of individuals contributes to the infantilization of the individuals and allows them to relax and not educate themselves or take part in their own governance." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "The single greatest tool for making moral people commit atrocities is group affiliation. The single greatest tool for promoting global human rights and equality is to end group affiliation." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "The idea that only a lawyer can understand the law was created to disguise the undermining of the basic principles of society. In order for a social contract to be binding, the principles must be easily taught to anyone, including children. No law must ever deviate from the principles of the social contract, therefore law ought to be largely intuitive." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "The fact that the legal system has remained so archaic strongly suggests that it is meant to remain inaccessible and subjective as that is best serving the interests of those in power. The discouragement people once faced for obtaining online medical advice, particularly from their peers, is greatly compounded for legal advice. This must change. People must recreate the legal systems to work for them, and that requires direct involvement at every level in the creation and implementation of the laws. The law, more than any other part of society, must be transparent, accessible, equal, and created by and for the people." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "Society with its dependencies and relationships has been converted to a completely monetized system of dissociation. For the first time in human history, people have been effectively dissociated from each other and are living in a state of no society." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "A public that was involved in helping to enforce laws could accomplish far more than a police force could by itself. Instead of blocking the entire internet under the pretense of blocking child porn sites, the police could just ask or allow the public to police the internet. If child porn or terrorist plotting sites can be found by anyone, they can be found by everyone. What is required is not secrecy and censorship but a proper structure for policing which involves the public." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "Entire industries would be made redundant by adherence to the principle of transparency for public organizations. Transparency in its literal sense, not selected pieces of isolated information wrapped up and presented by an official but full transparency, of the kind that would allow any passerby to see exactly what an organization was up to. As the current powers have been asking private individuals for decades, what do they have to hide? The kind of radical transparency that private individuals have been exposed to needs to be turned on all organizations and actions which have any impact on the public. Individuals require a right to privacy. Collaborativesociety requires full knowledge of organizations and actions which affect the public." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "A culture in which fame is the ultimate achievement cannot understand the value of ownerless ideas and shapeshifting personas. Anonymity has been equated almost exclusively with criminal activity by politicians and lawmakers." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "In many cases, anonymity is the only way for a messenger to ensure their message will be heard. Very often the story of the messenger will override the message. That is the way corporate media has been increasingly covering the news. We are at this point left with only messengers, rarely any message at all, and it is what audiences are trained to look for." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "Representative democracies are part of a personality driven celebrity culture where people are encouraged to support their chosen personalities or groups in any action they take. This has changed from recent history, where celebrity culture existed but was moderated. People were encouraged to choose principles they supported and ensure those principles were met by any action, regardless of the actor. The advantage of a personality driven system to those in power is it allows them to disregard the principles agreed to in a social contract. It also makes favour swapping and influence peddling the preferred methods of negotiation rather than simply negotiating each action on its own merits." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "While intellectual property rights need to be abolished as they are inhibiting progress and being used as a tool of inappropriate permanent economic control and intimidation, idea credit rights need far more recognitionand need to start being applied to the originator, not the copyright or patent holders. Credit theft is a severe impediment to equality. It is as common now as ever for a person with access to powerful forums to pick up an idea from a person unable to reach the public and use it to enhance their own reputation... Credit for one’s work or ideas is the right of every person. Credit provides the human dignity of societal recognition, approval and belonging. Credit for ideas and actions is an inherent part of personal identity. Unlike copying, which is not theft, taking credit deprives the rightful owner of it and is theft. There is no need to ever hide the origin of information unless the ultimate goal is to isolate them and suppress or twist their messages or use their work to glorify another." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "We need a system where urgent local news can be collected and amplified globally when necessary, and where the people of the world decide which news is important, not official news channels or celebrity nodes." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "While most action based systems can be completely open to participation by anyone, there are situations where an elite level of knowledge and accreditation of some sort is necessary prior to participation. Complicated surgery or engineering are examples of this type of work. While accreditation can and should come from the user group and be completely transparent and permeable, ability in many cases can only be reviewed by those who have attained an above average level of specialized knowledge. In these cases, there must be peer acknowledged levels of expertise attached to specific people, a situation not compatible with pure stigmergy or horizontal action.
>
> Idea based systems such as some scientific research, which should be open to all contributions, require extensive feedback and peer review of ideas, both to identify signal from noise and to provide knowledge bridges between elite levels of knowledge and casual users. In many specialized systems such as the pharmaceutical industry, the entire user group has an urgent interest in ensuring that ideas are properly audited but few have the interest or ability to inform themselves to the level necessary to be able to audit. No one has the time to inform themselves to an expert level of knowledge in every system which affects them, even if that information is completely transparent and available to all. In these systems, ideas need to be promoted by those users qualified to understand them.
>
> It is necessary to define a form of elitism, of ideas or people, that will take advantage of expertise but not remove control of a system from the end users. Ignoring elite knowledge in favour of a pretense at completely horizontal governance will not eliminate elitism, it willonly create hidden oligarchies dominated by those without the expertise required, usually celebrity personalities.
>
> In allowing this form of elitism, ultimate choice must always be left with the entire user group. An epistemic community is a knowledge resource only. Superior knowledge can only be forced to work for the wellbeing of the entire user group if authority remains with the entire user group and the epistemic community is forced to remain completely transparent and permeable. Science may dream of brilliant innovations, but the user group controls whether those are implemented or created. This authority also provides the incentive for transparency and knowledge bridges to explain reasoning to the entire group." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "Promoting ideas also allows auditing of an idea without all the unrelated distraction of attached personalities." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "It is the responsibility of each user in an open system to educate themselves to their own level of comfort using the data and user population at each level to inform themselves. Their input and decision making impact would then be commensurate with the expertise they acquire. The epistemic community in the centre should not need to protect themselves from demands orattacks from completely uninformed users. The circles of expertise which promoted them to the centre should also verify and explain their findings to the outer circles" - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "In representative democracy we have learned that people in general prefer to place their faith in leaders who are like them instead of leaders who are so expert they do not understand them. In order to avail ourselves of the greatest expertise on each topic, we must place our mostknowledgeable experts in a position of transparent authority while also providing a knowledge bridge leading from their ideas to the casually interested observer." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "The keys to allowing elite expertise but not allowing for elite conspiracies are transparency and knowledge bridges." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "The key to preventing elite knowledge from becoming a tyrannical oligarchy is to maintain control by the user group over action and decisions and treat epistemic communitiesalways as a knowledge resource, not a governing power." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "Open source software with forums open to all are a perfect working example of fully transparent and audited systems of elite knowledge. While the decisions are made by the developers, review and acceptance or rejection of the software is the right of the user group. If the developers refuse to listen to the user group and another development team is willing to work on the project, the original code can be forked and modified to meet the user requirements." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "Online courses such as those offered by Coursera where students teach each other and have direction from an epistemic community of instructors with knowledge bridges of graduates and fellow students is another example of a concentric circle in the cases where the course material is released as creative commons." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "The influence of celebrities from entertainment and sports industries over unrelated topics is illogical but widespread and they are more than ever expected to use that influence in areas completely outside their knowledge sphere." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

> "A cultural shift is required around celebrity. Celebrity was created to distract attention from issues the true oligarchies did not want scrutinized. The public’s ‘right to know’ was transferred from the business of the government to the plastic surgery of an entertainer." - [Binding Chaos, by Heather Marsh](https://georgiebc.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/bindingchaos6x9.pdf)

!!! Actually... "Binding Chaos" is absolute crap - word salad. ALL quotes by Heather should be scrutinized and maybe discarded.
====================================================

> "The Global Brain is a big idea. The Singularity is a big idea. The Global Brain Singularity is an even bigger idea. The Global Brain represents the idea that all humans and machines on planet Earth are forming (or already forms) an organized totality that will allow (or is allowing) higher order coherence without precedence in evolutionary history. The name ‘Global’ captures the ‘totalizing’ aspect of the phenomenon (all humans and all machines in one system); the name ‘Brain’ captures the metaphorical homology between the structure and function of biological brains and the structure and function of human civilization. The Singularity, in contrast, and specifically in the context of sociotechnological theory, represents the idea of a future qualitative transition in the phenomenal nature of human life. This future qualitative transition is typically described as a technologically mediated transcendence of our nature towards a transhuman or a posthuman horizon. When we combine the idea of the ‘Global Brain’ with the idea of the ‘Singularity’ we are trying to understand the immanence of both human beings and human civilization." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "What does it mean that a being has come into being which is modelling being and itself in increasingly recursive modalities?" - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "The evolutionary view is not deterministic and so we cannot say that the future emergence of a common governance and energy regime will be achieved. However, the possibility of such a common metasystem is the highest potentiality of a Global Brain Singularity." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "What does it mean to live within an evolutionary universe and be agents of fundamental evolutionary processes? We simply do not have sensical and well-defined answers to these questions. We are used to thinking about the human species as living in an immutable relation to some transcendental structure which exists and persists independent of our existence or action. What in the world happens to our understanding when the transcendental structure that overdetermines our existence becomes something that not only changes across time but is also something constituted by our action and modalities of being?" - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "The failure to understand culture, and in particular the relationship between biology and culture as part of cosmic evolution, may be one of the primary failings of science in the modern world. This is a factor in holding back progress in our understanding of both the nature of humanity and the future of humanity." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "Both reductionism and postmodernity, albeit successful in different ways within the sciences and humanities, cannot help us in terms of formulating a better understanding of universal history and its meaning for the human species moving forward into our common future." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "Throughout scientific history we have come to imagine ourselves as separate, marginal or accidental by-products in a meaningless universe. In fact, it has not been uncommon for scientific progress in understanding the universe to become coupled with a type of existential nihilistic worldview in relation to the human phenomenon." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "Whatever ‘act’ comes next in the ‘cosmic drama’ it will emerge from within the domain of collective human social values, cultural creativity and our exploration of latent technological possibility. In this way the universe gives the appearance of internalizing its future potentiality within a network of billions of biocultural nodes that in aggregate represent a phenomenon capable of producing yet another level of complex organization." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "Big history could be a chance to develop, eventually, a collective map making process to orient and guide humanity into the deeper future. What does it mean for future human action to be connected in a chain of evolutionary processes from the emergence of spacetime to the present? In this context big history has the opportunity to become simultaneously one story of our shared world as well as an infinite number of stories of how individuals can relate to that world and act in that world... Consequently, big history offers humanity a deeper perspective and an opportunity for cosmic reflection in relation to the meaning of human life from an exploration of the processes that culminated in our existence." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "The evolutionary-cybernetic properties of differentiation and integration are necessary to understand the growth of complexity. This is because networked patterns of interconnected distinctions inherently characterize increasingly complex systems, irrespective of material substrate. These increasingly complex networks enable multi-level adaptive capabilities (i.e. higher organism-environment relations) exhibiting emergent properties that are completely absent at lower levels of organization. Thus by studying the way differentiation and integration have progressed via new forms of cooperation big historians can identify commonality in the evolutionary processes that enabled continuous local development of hierarchical ordered levels. From this conceptual framework we can start to build a comprehensive view of the local universe as a region of ever-complexifying relationships, which produce new levels of organization facilitated by higher levels of awareness, and consequently, new living system goals and values in relation to the cosmic object. In elucidating the complexifying connections between all historical processes we may be able to provide a foundation for understanding both our contemporary world and our potential future." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "All living systems must be dynamically embedded or embodied in their environment, allowing them to define context-dependent functional survival and reproduction goals, as well as overcome challenges in relationship with their socioecological circumstances. As a result, all living systems define, either perceptually or conceptually, boundaries between internal organization and the environment. These boundaries serve the dual function of protecting achieved internal organization (i.e. ‘self’) as well as enabling further growth and learning from interaction with the environment (i.e. active knowledge construction), the latter of which is bounded only by finite available energy and the internal cognitive information processing capabilities of the living system. From this perspective the life history of biological systems can be defined by this process of controlling available energy and directing it intelligently towards goals and values that have a biological or cultural relation to survival, growth and reproduction." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "Unlike biological evolution, which operates on the generational selection of functional chemical information structured by the genome, cultural evolution operates on the real-time selection of functional symbolic information structured by language. As a consequence, biological structures like genes, chromosomes and genomes - as well as cultural structures like ideas, theories and worldviews - are subject to evolutionary selection pressures in humans. This functional symbolic information can produce both adaptive behaviours and adaptive technology." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "As a general principle, the more faithfully a society can store and transmit cultural information between cultural beings and across cultural generations, the less functional cultural information is lost (i.e. ‘backward slippage’), and the easier it becomes for any given cultural collective to build upon the complexity of inherited cultural knowledge (i.e. ‘ratcheting’). In this sense, the speed of cultural change is a rough function of the qualitative efficiency and quantitative number of conversations (i.e. idea sharing/sex) being conducted within and between individuals and populations." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "Cultural evolution, or the reproduction of symbolic code, will not necessarily remain dependent on a biological substrate indefinitely." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "There is a struggle of ideas, theories and worldviews within the symbolic order, but this struggle is an increasingly conscious struggle for the universality of the symbolic order itself. Thus in the cultural evolutionary context progressive symbolic differentiation does give the signal of approaching an internal closure of the process itself." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "Even in the face of overwhelming global obstacles (or even because we face overwhelming global obstacles), we cannot forget the hope for a higher world: a world where the structural conditions of civilization enable the highest flourishing of the human creative imagination; or even: the distributed emergence of a collective common goal that does not rest on an external necessary God [either religious (/supernatural), governmental (/bureaucratic), or market (/financial)] but on an internally generated intersubjective value system supporting collective freedom and immortality (a true universality)." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "The objective rational capitalist individual of the modern world needs to be rethought on the fundamental level." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "We need different modes of sociopolitical governance. Complex systems science teaches us that local, bottom-up and distributed coordination are typically the most effective and capable mechanisms for enabling emergent global order in highly complex environments. This is because, in complex systems, there are simply too many differentiated parts for effective top- down mechanisms for coordination to stably function and synergize the whole. Thus any global systems science and serious sociopolitical global development agenda must understand how to maintain a new planetary organization with dynamic and distributed mechanisms that lead to self-organization (as opposed to static and hierarchical historical mechanisms that produce centralized organization)." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "Global brain theory posits that human society will achieve a globally distributed organization through the emergence of a higher metasystem mediated by the self-organization of the internet and the technologies we use to interconnect on a planetary scale." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "In the same way the humanist-atheist axis challenged and overcame ancient religious and sociopolitical fundamentalisms consequently producing modernity; now the transmodernist axis must emerge to challenge postmodern relativistic thinking by positing a higher transcendental transhumanism as dedicated to forming its own ground. Such a ground could potentially be imagined under the scheme of a self-organized commons. Faith in our own ability and our own mind is the only way to overcome postmodern tensions and cynicism produced by contemporary government, market and religious fundamentalist historical traps." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "I do not think we should simply deconstruct the State, or Capitalism or Religion, but rather radically democratize and distribute the processes that are currently actualized in the State, Capital and Religion via reflective dialectical engagement." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "Charles Darwin made a brief commentary on the possibility of global union of humanity in The Descent of Man, suggesting that “only an artificial barrier” prevented the human community from extending to “all nations and races” (1871, p. 96)." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "Metasystem transition theory (MST) is a general systems- level approach to understand the control of a higher level of complex organization and also a potential future singularity towards controlling a global superorganism. According to MST, higher levels of control organization can emerge from the coordination of less ordered subsystems. This type of higher coordination is hypothesized to emerge from the selection for more advanced information processing and communications, which enables previously disparate entities to synergistically coordinate their activities. Consequently, such systemic transitions change the relationship between the parts they are composed of, and (if successful) lead towards new emergent and stable characteristics of the whole, through the exploration of (in our context) new (sociotechnological) connections, new (sociotechnological) distinctions, and consequently, new (sociotechnological) possibility spaces." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "The global brain could become omniscient in the sense of possessing all practical knowledge necessary to deal with humanity’s global challenges, omnipresent in the sense of having a coherent view of what is happening everywhere in the world at the moment, omnipotent in the sense of eliminating waste and maximizing efficiency in regards to energy, transportation and control, and omnibenevolent in the sense of attempting to maximize benefit and reduce harm inflicted on all individuals." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "Another potential ramification is that the importance of financial capital could be replaced by a shift towards the importance of ‘social capital’ (i.e. psychological self-actualization and community building). In this potential future direction our adult socioeconomic lives could become increasingly dominated by finding important ways to interconnect and relate to each other as social and creative beings, as opposed to our current reality of finding ways to interconnect and relate to each other as economic agents (Rifkin 2014)." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "We must fundamentally rethink the nature of human controls: without the courage to acknowledge that nation-states are inadequate structures, globalization is ‘just a sham’. Part of the problem is that the psychology of the modern mind has been so fundamentally shaped by the nation-state that it is difficult for most to imagine the structure of a different world. However, remaining symbolically faithful to the nation-state, when its function as a structural control is so clearly endangering socioeconomic and ecological progress is dangerous as many of our most pressing problems related to economics, ecology and social space do not have borders (i.e. they are global, with an earth-space boundary only)." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "The emergence of the internet has created the foundations for an increasingly global world. In this context we must consider ways to approach a new form of globalization that is shaped by the whole of humanity. This will require a metasystem transition toward a higher level of systems complexity by reinventing the established control hierarchy. This reinvention could allow for the establishment of controls that maximize distributed intelligence and direct democracy within a digital medium that functions from ‘local to global’. Of course, this will require massive control innovation and a cultural revolution committed to radical distribution of concentrated power. Here we can learn from the founders of enlightenment if we have the daring to actually realize their transcendent dreams. There is no reason why control needs to possess a specific physical location in a truly mature information age. Instead, power could be distributed among all interconnected citizens in a multipolar Global Village. Such an organization should allow us to safely navigate the next frontier metasystem of humanity’s evolutionary experiment." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "It is clear that our ‘present state’ is now out of line with the ‘goal state’ of a governance organization for the global brain." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "In the monarchical form one or a small group of agents defines all problems relevant to the system as a whole, and explores opportunities unavailable to other agents in the system as a whole. In the democratic form a small group of agents still defines problems and explores opportunities but must undergo constant change and replacement, and also must be subjected to constant feedback processes from the populous as a whole. In the theoretical commons form the center loses its ‘agential dimension’ and instead emerges from the collective interaction of agential consciousness. In this sense the center gains its coherence only from the distributed problem definition and opportunity exploration of the network of agential consciousness in-itself." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "The failure of religious institutions, particular the Abrahamic religious institutions, to become more decentralized and distributed has arguably defined by their controversial existence throughout the industrial era. Indeed the majority of the atheist critique of religion has little to do with serious transcendental arguments related to the existence or nonexistence of God, and much more to do with social system repression, power and control, which is a feature of centralized and hierarchical organizations. Moreover there has been a recent flourishing of spiritual belief systems and spiritual practices that are capable of expressing the human relationship to the divine without the strict adherence to a single text or scripture.
>
> In this nuanced perspective it becomes difficult to know exactly how to interpret the future of religion with any absolute certainty. However, in the challenge propagation framework we can say that the future of spirituality or belief in the supernatural must figure out how to reinvent itself within the context of a structural reorganization of how humans relate to the spirit. Humans have inherent spiritual needs and these needs can manifest in many different ways. In order to foster this spiritual need for faith in a higher power or source or cause of existence the best practice in a challenge propagation framework would be to create the discursive spaces where a real active dialogue about spirituality and faith can emerge. These discursive spaces need not represent one religious leader or one religious domination but allow for conceptual boundaries to be flexible and dynamic and contingent on the needs expressed in the dialogue.
>
> If this model is useful in a prescriptive and predictive context then the future spiritual communities will be built on distributed emergence, without the need for permanent leaders, authorities or denomination. This in fact mirrors the patterns we discussed in regards to the future of governance. In essence, religious organizations need to become more decentralized and distributed so that ideas of how the human spirit or consciousness relates to its existential condition can be expressed with less friction or distortion. This would allow different religious groups or identities to move past any theological divisions and find a common meaning or purpose for the twenty-first century that is more in-line with religion’s core drive which is to provide an outlet for people to explore their relationship to the unknown or unknowable.
>
> In this context religion can be revived by focusing on the very real dimension of problems for consciousness that have no final or complete answer but are rather fundamental mysteries of the historical process. Some of these very real dimensions include an understanding of universal ethics or morality, the structure of life and death, the design or construction or creation of the universe and the meaning of society and experience in a cosmic context. These dimensions of inquiry are as pressing for contemporary consciousness as they have ever been for consciousness. Thus the possibility for a revived understanding of spirituality and human relation to religion is now an informational potentiality which requires us to rethink a meaningful structure to information control." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "The theoretical emphasis in technological singularity literature (i.e. emergence of AGI) almost completely ignores the systemic dynamics of technological revolution in relation to the emerging sociotechnological sphere mediated by the totality of the internet as universal medium. In missing this systemic dynamic the technological singularity literature fails to even confront basic issues of systemic transitions in relation to control, power and hierarchy, and thus basic issues of systemic transitions in terms of social, economic and political life." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "In the AGI technological singularity vision humanity’s attention becomes focused on individual machine-learning programs that enter ‘self-recursive cycles’ of exponential intellect improvement towards ‘post-humanity’. However, in the GB technological singularity vision humanity’s attention becomes focused on collective global issues and metasystemic transitions related to power, control and hierarchy. This is not to say that the GB technological singularity vision totally negates the possibility of the emergence of AGI or even post-humanity, but rather approaches the emerging technological revolution as a phenomenon that must be grounded in the totality of sociotechnological process." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "In this sense what is wrong with most socioeconomic or sociotechnological thinking today is that it precisely ignores the most important element, i.e. the subjective dimension of socio-processes. At the structural ‘micro-foundations’ of capitalism is the subjective valuation of profit as hegemonic to all other forms of value. Thus, in the same way that a few people thinking in a new way about money and what to do with money due to the rise of new forms of industrial productive potential in the 19th century changed the socioeconomic conditions of the human world (i.e. universal subjective valuation of profit maximization via market exchange over and above all other values), we should again, simply, go back to the ‘micro-foundations’, think new forms of subjective valuation, and draw out their large-scale socioeconomic consequences, i.e. what would be the resulting ‘macro-foundations’ as ‘large-scale political collectives’ that developed due to new ‘micro-foundations’?" - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "Is there not a way to organize the human world with a more distributed and open-ended understanding of subjective valuation so that the homogenizing dimension of ‘profit-maximization as human nature’ could be replaced with a multi-dimensional and processual understanding of human nature?" - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "An ‘offer network’ as a basic mechanic for the collaborative commons would be described as ‘fields of societal exchange facilitating the self-organization of goods/services built on the foundation of trust and reputation as a primary bonding mechanisms’." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "Can the Global Brain as a ‘universal coordination medium’ that ‘self-organizes on a planetary level’ function to inscribe a world that operates on ‘Global Commons’ logic (systems of access and democratic management) over and above both market and state logic? Would this not be a world where ‘automated smart systems’ and ‘distributed social/offer networks’ become universalized towards serving humanist-ecological use value?" - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "In Governing the Commons (1990) Ostrom set out to articulate how the ‘state/market’ could be broken with a ‘radical third’ of a commons as ‘institutions for collective action’ with a specific focus on their establishment and management. In other words, instead of systems controlling property and labour (nation-states), or systems producing and consuming commodities (markets), the commons are systems for managing and distributing shared resources and spaces with a core of direct democracy (as opposed to representative democracy). For Ostrom, one of the key notions for the successful establishment and maintenance of a commons based on access is how these systems identify and properly manage ‘Common Pool Resources’ (CPR), which she identifies as resources and spaces that are inherently ‘common’ but also ‘scarce’ and thus ‘rival’. In other words, overcoming the problem of establishing and managing CPRs in a commons is the foundation for ‘de-commodification’ and ‘opening a commonwealth’, and perhaps, the key shift in transforming neoliberal institutions (and the multinational corporations that thrive under their reign) into commons institutions capable of establishing an automated and collaborative commons.
>
> In this frame a resource/space an be generally defined as a CPR if one agent/persons use of the resource/space will subtract from any other agent/persons use and where it is often necessary, but difficult and costly, to exclude another agent/persons use outside the group from using the resource/space. Here there are numerous and extremely diverse examples of such ‘rival/scarce’ resources/spaces that could be classified as a ‘CPR’: fishers, grazing grounds, parks, farms, transportation grids, and so forth. In Ostrom’s analysis of systems for collective action that benefit the common good (i.e. higher levels of cooperation) there are always simple yet fundamental problems related to (Ostrom 1990, p. 27):
>
> A) Coping with free-riding
>
> B) Solving commitment problems
>
> C) Arranging for the supply of new institutions, and
>
> D) Monitoring individual compliance with sets of rules
>
> Furthermore, Ostrom did not just identify the problems that prevent the emergence and stabilization of commons institutions for collective action, but also identified key ‘design principles’ that can solve these problems, which include (Ostrom 1990, p. 90):
>
> A) Group boundaries clearly defined
>
> B) Rules governing the use of collective goods are well matched to local needs and conditions
>
> C) Most individuals affected by these rules can participate in modifying the rules
>
> D) The rights of community members to devise their own rules is respected by external authorities
>
> E) A system for monitoring member’s behaviour exists; the community members themselves undertake this monitoring
>
> F) A graduate system of sanctions is used
>
> G) Community members have access to low-cost conflict resolution mechanisms
>
> H) For CPRs that are parts of larger systems: appropriation, provision, monitoring, enforcement, conflict resolution, and governance activities are organized in multiple layers of nested enterprises
>
> The first thing for GB theorists to note here is the difficulty in understanding and implementing the relation between the ‘local’ dimension and the ‘global’ dimension. In other words, although both the automated and collaborative functions of the commons would ideally fall within a universal medium that intelligently satisfied all human necessities - some form of ‘post- monetary’ ‘offer network’ (Goertzel 2015; Heylighen 2016b) - this universal medium must also be nested in order to meet CPR demands on multiple interacting levels, e.g. regional, continental, international and global. On the practical level there are functions of human civilization that operate on different levels of organization, e.g. regional health facilities require different commons demands than do international transportation networks or global environmental problems, etc. But on the second societal and cultural level there is the simple fact that real groups and communities exist at multiple levels with specific needs and desires that cannot be totally ignored and replaced with a totalizing and ideological abstract universalism (i.e. ‘We are all One world community, and so forth’). Thus, the point of Ostrom’s commons ‘design principles’ is that, although they complicate the situation of establishing and maintaining a commons, they are at the same time necessary preconditions for the commons long-term viability as well the growth of pluralism and diversity within a new universal level of organization." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "Our civilization does not face a “black hole of intelligence” as the concept of technological singularity suggests. Instead, when properly framed in big historical terms I believe it is clear that we face the full emergence of a new evolutionary pathway: the true birth and independence of cultural evolution. As we covered when discussing cosmic evolution, networks of cultural symbols code for inner conceptual experience, outward conceptual behaviour, as well as for technological structures. This can be seen as analogous to the way that networks for chemicals code for inner perceptual experience, outward perceptual behaviour, as well as for biological structures. Consequently, the biocultural human lives in both a perceptual and a conceptual cognitive landscape, and the technologies we produce are an integral aspect to the cultural evolutionary process." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "Cultural evolution is a new pathway, but it is a pathway that has not gained its own independence. Culture is dependent on biogenesis for its own existence and thus all of human evolution is a biocultural phenomenon. As mentioned, if symbolic systems manage to construct technological systems with biological properties (i.e. technological life), this would no longer be the case. The biocultural being would become a transitory stage between the worlds of the biochemical and the worlds of the technocultural." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "As the architects of the modern project realized, we are not quite biological animal, and we are not quite technologically divine: our existence is a dramatic temporal tension in the act of becoming something far beyond our imagination (i.e. beyond what we can currently represent with our symbolic structures or create with our technological structures). Thus my approach to a biocultural theory of human evolution is perhaps best described as explicitly modernist and ‘Nietzschean’ (Nietzsche 1883, p. 27): “Man is a rope stretched between the animal and the Superman - a rope over an abyss.”" - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "In my attempt at a holistic biocultural theory of human evolution, I consider myself as attempting to build upon the approach to cultural evolution that was stressed by the late anthropologist Leslie White (1949, p. xviii): “Culture may be considered a self-contained, self-determined process; one that can be explained only in terms of itself.” Only in terms of itself: this is to say that culture is not caused or determined by biological processes. Culture may currently depend on a particular genetic and neurological foundation, but it is its own emergent process, operating according to entirely different evolutionary ends. As mentioned, in biological evolution diversification does not lead to integration of the biological order itself. In contrast, as cultural evolution diversifies there does appear a direction towards an integration of the symbolic order itself (which is what I mean by “operating according to entirely different evolutionary ends”). Self-contained, self-determined process: this is to say that in order to support cultural evolution with symbolic inheritance and creation you must first have a high degree of self-reflexivity and self-awareness. In other words, aware mind(s) bridge the gap between the world of biological evolution and the world of cultural evolution, lifting life into a totally new domain of virtual creation and imagination (i.e. the self becomes aware of what is not (symbolic imagination), but also of what could be (symbolic representation)) (Frye 1947, p. 47): “We are fearfully and wonderfully made, but in terms of what our imaginations suggest we could be, we are a hideous botch…”" - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "“Atechnogenesis (AY-tech-noh-JEN-e-siss): a cultural process in cosmic evolution whereby symbolic information processing and reproduction transcends mindless design (natural selection) by developing a self-producing substrate of mind design.” In the same way that ‘abiogenesis’ means ‘biology arising from not-biology’, ‘atechnogenesis’ refers to a process whereby ‘technology arises from not-technology’. This may sound counter- intuitive at first but the whole of human evolution can be conceptualized as a gradual (yet accelerating) process where symbolically mediated mind was able to conjure technological structures out of ‘not-technology’. Every technology that has ever existed - from an Oldowan hand axe to the most advanced supercomputer - is an organization of atomic systems designed by an aware mind from constituent elements that were previously ordered or organized within a formerly geological, chemical or biological physical structure. This is to say that the emergence of any technology is a symbolic process where mind creates technological organization out of ‘not-technology’." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "The most important shift in the process is a shift towards a world where the existential substrate switches its design mechanism: from the mechanism of what has traditionally been called ‘natural selection’ towards a mechanism that has/can be called many things, i.e. ‘intentional’, ‘purposeful’, ‘aware’, ‘cultural’, ‘mind’ selection. I am less interested in what this mechanism is called and more interested in the fact that this cognitive selection process is driven by self- reflexivity and self-awareness enabling biocultural humans to direct their own evolution with cultural symbols; is laden with internal meaning, intention and purpose; and could eventually culminate with an existential substrate that reflects this mind-driven symbolic ability (i.e. the world as the human mind wants to see it). Consequently, if the process of atechnogenesis reaches its completion and the age of technogenesis commences, the material composition of humanity’s existential substrate (e.g. carbon, silicon) will be less important than the fact that the material composition of humanity’s existential substrate will be purposefully and intentionally designed." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "When we think of the technocultural era in big historical terms we are not so much confronted with the future of ‘humans’ (as we typically think of humans) but the future of self-designed intelligent-spiritual ‘beings’ self-organized towards a higher level of thought... The technological singularity concept forces us to imagine a black hole of experience, an event horizon beyond which we could know nothing for certain about the deep future. In contrast, with the concepts of atechnogenesis, technogenesis and technoculture we are confronted with a new evolutionary pathway, a pathway fundamentally (1) directed by aware minds, (2) mediated through symbolic-linguistic codes, and (3) built upon a self-designed substrate." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "The combination of higher energy flow, information processing, cultural differentiation and sociopolitical integration could create the foundations for an emergent organization with a far higher possibility space than any historical society. This shift will include a qualitative leap in all of the dimensions of our personal lives, including how we relate to our own mind and life, how we relate to the world, and how we relate to each other (not to mention who we call ‘we’) (Hofstadter 2003). Historically, these dimensions of our experience have been shaped by our evolved biological perceptions, the replication of our symbolic structures, and the sociopolitical structures of historical civilization. However, in a technocultural world the mechanisms for sensory perception, replication of symbolic structures and sociopolitical organization will all have foundationally changed, likely leading towards a planetary network of unprecedented cultural and technological creation: tens of billions of minds in free association, exploring deeper levels of interconnection, and internal/external reflection than possible within a purely biological substrate." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "Many have stated that this potential ‘end of death’ could lead to the ‘death of meaning’. As far as we know a horizon of meaning constitutes itself against an anti-background of nothingness or death. Throughout the entirety of human life history the game of life has been the game of generation and death after generation of death. Being are ‘thrown’ (Heidegger 1962) into existence, struggle to make sense of their existence (search for meaning), and then fall out of existence. The human being added conceptual awareness to the struggle. Human civilization added collective learning to the struggle. Humans individually and humanity collectively create or participate in ‘immortal cultures’ and ‘make history’. In some psychoanalytic theories this participatory act in culture can be interpreted as a traumatic repression of our irreducible mortality and finitude (Brown 1959, p. 101). This drive against death means that humans are not ‘simply’ mortal and finite entities but rather mortal and finite entities ‘pathologized’ by desires for immortality and infinity (Freud 1920; Zupančič 2000). Dealing with the conceptual awareness of this paradoxical existential matrix of mortality-immortality, finitude-infinity, has thus also been hypothesized as both a motivation of civilization action (Cave 2012), and a constitutive problem of civilization action (Zupančič 2017). How do we human beings use our sexual and creative energy in light of the fact that we all going to die and return to non-being/nothingness? How would we use our sexual and creative energy if we were involved in an endless process of becoming? We can frame this internal psychological tension as both an inspiration (i.e. an ‘inspired suffering’ of history (Frye 1970)), and something to be collectively overcome (Brown 1967, p. 53): “The conclusion of the whole matter - Blake: ‘We are in a world of Generation and death, and this world we must cast off.’”" - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "Beyond immortality the deepest possibilities and surprises of the technocultural world will likely come, not from radical life extension, but from radical life expansion, in terms of cognitive growth and interconnection. Therefore, when we explore the technocultural world experientially, we reach a world of deeply integrated minds in planetary interconnection, and whatever that interconnection will birth." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "Cyberneticist Valentin Turchin thoughtfully contemplated the possibility of a deeply integrated human super-being (1977, p. 259): “How far will integration of individuals go? There is no doubt that in the future (and perhaps not too far in the future) direct exchange of information among nervous systems of individual people (leading to their physical integration) will become possible.”" - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "Art was a qualitative emergence that resulted from the increased informational transfer abilities acquired through the expansion of the neocortex and the evolution of language. Of course the same goes for the other uniquely human cultural activities like sciences, poetry, philosophy, mathematics, music, etc. Thus in the past we have clear evidence that quantitative increases in brain capacity can lead to the radical emergence of new qualitative properties which then proceed to play a dominant causal role in future evolutionary processes. What new symbolic or mind properties will emerge from a further technological expansion of the neocortex and further evolution of language towards closer mind-to-mind communication? And what will emerge from the new ecosystems of purely technological mind?
>
> Technocultural beings will be able to share extraordinary high levels of information at the speed of light, and via much more reliable mechanisms, likely via direct mind connection with others and with our collective computer networks (i.e. our ‘digital twins’ or ‘personal AIs’) (Kurzweil 2014). That is to say that the (practically) instant transmission of information files (for example: books, movies, music, photographs etc.) could be transferred between minds directly and understood near-instantaneously. All minds would have a dramatically expanded understanding of acquired knowledge, allowing for an unprecedented level of ‘cultural ratcheting’ (Tennie et al. 2009) or ‘collective learning’ (Christian 2004). The generational barriers towards knowledge transfer may even by completely overcome. Beings would also be able to communicate vast reaches of their mind through virtual recreations of any and all varieties in mediums of expression that currently do not exist.
>
> But these are the quantitative aspects of future mind. The qualitative aspects are much harder to describe and anticipate, as they will be emergent in their very nature, potentially enabling new forms of game, adventure, exploration, ecstasy and mystery in physical spaces, but also intersubjective virtual spaces." - [Global Brain Singularity, by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "The difficulty we face in trying to evaluate [the future of intelligence] at our current scale of intelligence would be similar to the challenge facing an intelligent bacterium in our gut that is trying to make sense of the social interactions we engage in." - [John Stewart](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2018/11/phd-thesis-articles-pdf.pdf)

> "Rather than being dictated top down, we can only hope that the religion of tomorrow will emerge and evolve bottom up. Religion seems to be very much like language, and we’ve seen plenty of failed top-down invented “better” languages as well as religions." - [Why we need a new religion, by Octopusyarn](https://octopusyarn.substack.com/p/why-we-need-a-new-religion)

> "It’s easy to discard “religion” altogether when it is understood merely as superstitious adherence to conventions of a holy book, as the “new atheists” have shown. Yes, an all-powerful, all-benevolent creator reigning from the heavens does seem like a childish projection of a father figure. Shitting on SkyDaddy may be fun and allow detached analytical types to feel superior, but it’s cheap to dunk on a strawman." - [Why we need a new religion, by Octopusyarn](https://octopusyarn.substack.com/p/why-we-need-a-new-religion)

> "A more interesting framing of religion is to view it as the fabric that ties society together. And what tied traditional societies of a distant past together obviously won’t be able to take on that role today. However, weaving this shared social fabric of religion may be the only way we know of to organise society past the Dunbar number. A broader definition of religion would also include our stories about technology, art, nation states, etc. Geertz defines religion as a “system of symbols which acts to establish pervasive and long-lasting moods and motivations in society”.
>
> Any widely shared beliefs, stories, and practices could be conceived of as religious in this broader definition that we are considering here. From trust in the institution of science to the story of progress through globalisation to the ritual of accepting printed paper for goods - it’s all religious in this broader framing.
>
> Layman Pascal proposes that religion is fundamentally about the harmonisation and integration of culture, technology, politics, etc. at a given time and place. If this religious integration is successful, it results in an excess of meaning and coherence that can translate into a numinous experience that binds communities together. From this point of view, religion stops seeming like an antiquated mode of superstition. Rather, the emergence of a religion that creates a right integration and surplus coherence for our times suddenly seems like an urgent priority.
>
> Old Friedrich declared the death of God more than 140 years ago. And the damn corps has been rotting for so long that we can no longer ignore the stench. As social animals that relate to the world and each other through justifications, it seems like we need a narrative that gives purpose to our lives. Yet more and more find it impossible to believe the silly dogmas of the cultural fossils we generally call “religion”, or to participate in their dead rituals. This is neither an apology for ancient superstitions nor an attempt to resurrect Skydaddy, but we have to admit that there is a gaping hole that these relics used to fill for our ancestors.
>
> Alexander Bard asserts that we are inherently tribal and religious and that our reaching for a unifying mythos is non-negotiable, even automatic. Even if God is dead, we can’t help but create a new one, even if unconsciously.
>
> > Modern society was never atheist, it just pushed its pantheon into the unconscious, glossed it over with science, money, and status - subconsciously worshipping Gucci God and Mammon.
>
> Some might argue that Capital has become our new God - a delicious throwback to the biblical golden calf. A more encompassing diagnosis would be that we ourselves have taken on the role of God in the advent of humanism. Anthropos on the throne, Mammon (Capital & markets) to his right, and Scientia to her left. Seems fitting, since humans are now literally the force shaping our planet (Anthropocene, etc.). Homo Deus wields weapons many orders of magnitude more powerful than what the Gods of old could dream of. Little Boy makes Thor’s hammer and Zeus’ lightning look like Nerf guns. Armageddon is just an autocrat with a big red button away.
>
> As Daniel Schmachtenberger diagnosed astutely, a civilization with godly power but lacking in wisdom will self-terminate inexorably. And even if we don’t blow ourselves up, we will eventually degrade the very substrate we depend on in our mindless strive for (economic) growth and progress, as mandated by the archangels of consumerist humanism.
>
> Our unconscious global religion not only fails to put us in right relationship with each other and the planet, but it also can’t answer our call for meaning. We are left trapped in a state of the Absurd - feeling atomized, alienated, and nihilistic." - [Why we need a new religion, by Octopusyarn](https://octopusyarn.substack.com/p/why-we-need-a-new-religion)

> "The religion of tomorrow needs to resolve these existential issues and falls short if it does not address these coordination failures at the root cause. Because all of these issues are global in nature, we need a religion of global scope. Returning humans to their proper place as the nervous system of Gaia instead of cancer eating away at the very substrate that sustains it. " - [Why we need a new religion, by Octopusyarn](https://octopusyarn.substack.com/p/why-we-need-a-new-religion)

> "In addition to these “objective” crises, we are facing a “subjective” crisis of meaning. From Marx to Byung-Chul Han, the persistent alienation and atomization of “modern man” has been diagnosed to death without being able to shift us out of the predicament. Whether we call it “left brain chauvinism” (McGilchrist etc.) or the “tyranny of the propositional” (Vervaeke), there seems to be something off at the very core of our culture. Vervaeke’s work is probably the most complete in outlining an actual solution: The process of relevance realization, if liberated from parasitic processing, can return us to a multi-modal connectedness to the world around us and one another. All [4 kinds of knowing](https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/theory-knowledge/202101/john-vervaeke-s-brilliant-4p3r-metatheory-cognition#:~:text=With%20his%204P%20model%2C%20he,procedural%3B%20and%204)%20propositional.) need to be honed in ecologies of practices to afford an “optimal grip” on reality characterized by flow and insight cascades." - [Why we need a new religion, by Octopusyarn](https://octopusyarn.substack.com/p/why-we-need-a-new-religion)

> "Metamodern Religion needs to provide ecologies of practices that can return us to the right relationship with each other and the world and protect us from intersubjective parasites.
>
> Together with the external crisis described above, we can then conclude that Metamodern Religion faces the Herculean task of resolving both the Meta Crisis and the Meaning Crisis. I think a genuine religion of our time would resolve our most pressing issues both internally and externally.
>
> In summary, we note the following requirements for Metamodern Religion:
>
> 1. It needs to provide a sense of personal and shared meaning. This includes moral and ontological frameworks that provide orientation in the world.
>
> 2. Its narratives should be able to tie into previous religious views while updating them with our latest scientific understandings. The unifying narrative should allow for significantly different interpretations, practices, and ways of living without losing coherence and fragmenting into competing sects.
>
> 3. Existential risk needs to be directly addressed, from climate catastrophe and ecocide to nuclear proliferation and the dangers of rogue AI. Ideally, it would address the “generator function” of these issues, resolving all classes of coordination failures such as multipolar traps and the tragedy of the commons.
>
> 4. Psycho-technologies and ecologies of practice need to be built in to allow for personal and collective transformation. We will likely need a large portfolio of techniques that is applied selectively depending on cultural and personal circumstances.
>
> 5. Last but not least, it should prevent the failure modes of previous religions, including weaponization for controlling the population and petrification into outdated dogma." - [Why we need a new religion, by Octopusyarn](https://octopusyarn.substack.com/p/why-we-need-a-new-religion)

> "The task at hand is to decidedly reject the toxic tendencies of religions (dogma and institutionalized power structures) while exapting their social functions in a way that works for a specific time and place." - [The anatomy of religions, by Octopusyarn]()

> "New atheists didn’t get Chesterton’s fence. They missed how important religion is for social cohesion and a sense of meaning. This is ironic, given Dawkins’ work on Memetics is explicitly about the adaptive fitness of ideas." - [Redeeming Christian concepts, by Octopusyarn]()

> "It makes sense to think of the Devil as a transpersonal being, an egregore. Evil, in turn, is a relational process that creates suffering, not a fixed characteristic. The Devil rises from social conditions that foster Evil." - [Redeeming Christian concepts, by Octopusyarn]()

> "What would religion be without a concept of God? Even though it's arguable the term may carry too much historical baggage, it seems an equivalent concept as a pointer of ultimate value is critical for the overall function of the system." - [A Headless God or religion for our times, by Octopusyarn]()

> "God emerges from an ever-evolving, interconnected net of relations." - [A Headless God or religion for our times, by Octopusyarn]()

> "Traditionally religious speculations have already been coming back as hypotheses wrapped in “science-y” language for the past decades already (see the demarcation problem). The simulation hypothesis is just tech bro gnosticism. The Omega point and the singularity are Silicon Valley eschatology. Cosmological inflation, complexification, quantum entanglement, many worlds. Many words. And all of them have religious implications and offer competing grand narratives, whether their pundits admit it or not. Many of them tie in with great religious traditions and philosophers alike (Hegel, Whitehead, Bergson, de Chardin). A re-integration therefore does not seem out of reach, and we will continue to see more convincing attempts. The prototypical example is Wilber’s Integralism, and more recently, Metamodernism. Interesting attempts that focus even more on the narrative aspects continue to show up, e.g. Emergentism or The Romance of Reality.
>
> While the vanguard of science is still undecided on major questions (e.g. interpretations of quantum mechanics or the nature of consciousness) and different narrative strands will end up with quite different interpretations, some common elements seem clear. First and foremost, a development through time with distinct phase changes of emergence with increasing complexity seems like a common denominator. " - [A Headless God or religion for our times, by Octopusyarn]()

> "Being self-aware of its constructedness, a metamodern God concept needs to be able to sustain critique. Daniel Görtz describes this concept of a headless God as follows: “It is a God whose altar can be pissed upon, is insulted again and again, yet remains sacred, is resurrected. (...) Always on its way to the guillotine.” This allows for an anti- fragile dynamic where whatever belief structures are left after ferocious critique can be believed in with much more conviction. This constant critique also acts as a pruning function to get rid of structures no longer needed. Since our God is anti- fragile, there should be no hesitation in tearing down any narratives that are disproven by our scientific advances and reconstructing ones that better reflect reality." - [A Headless God or religion for our times, by Octopusyarn]()

> "This ain’t no fun as a single-player game; Metamodern Religion only comes to life with a collective of believers. Self-aware narrativity is also how we might hope that an increasing number of people will resonate with the stories we come up with: Any valid critique and additions that are useful while being coherent should be included without hesitation. As time progresses, the petrified dogmas of traditional religions will become ever more inconsistent. All the while, the population on average develops further and Metamodern Religion will exert an inexorable pull on adherents of traditional religions. At the same time, more scientific minded people would notice that the stories are in agreement with their worldview but provide much more personal and collective meaningfulness, so they too would be tempted to join in. Filling the God-shaped hole in our hearts in a way that doesn’t compromise on rationality is somewhat of a no-brainer.
>
> Metamodern religion will only feel intersubjectively real once a critical mass of “believers” subscribe to it. Just because we know that it’s just a story we made up doesn’t make it feel any less real. Even more so, we can believe it because we know we made it up. There is a certain bootstrapping principle at play here that reminds of Alexander Bard’s Syntheos, the created God, and the concept of Hyperstition. Like a collective placebo effect, we might be surprised how real our headless God will feel once enough of us have agreed on a version we could believe in." - [A Headless God or religion for our times, by Octopusyarn]()

> "How could such a convoluted structure possibly scale to a global religion? The answer is that not everybody has to understand it, they just need to participate in it. I can type these words without knowing how my laptop works. It is much easier to function within a given system than work on the systemic level itself. Only a small part of the population will be called to do the latter and both help Metamodern Religion emerge in the first place and then improve and maintain it. Whoever is called to this work will likely have a certain temperament and a certain level of development in specific areas. Whatever personality typology or developmental frameworks we might apply here, the conclusion will always be that it’s a rather small part of the population. Only these “shamanoid” personalities (as [Bard calls them](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r9gYpj0WLcg)) would need to understand the functioning of the structure as a whole and likely undergo significant training to take up their role as stewards or “priests” of Metamodern Religion." - [Cosmo-local coordination, by Octopusyarn](https://octopusyarn.substack.com/p/cosmo-local-coordination)

> "Rather than an “individual”, we might use the term “dividual” to highlight the primacy of relationship and interconnectedness." - [Transforming cultures and selves, by Octopusyarn](https://octopusyarn.substack.com/p/transforming-cultures-and-selves)

> "What a treat to be thinking about how to address societies’ biggest problems with a complex system of interlocking holons that have a transformative impact across ontologies to solve global coordination, install new universal values, guide behavior, and create a fractal stack of personal meaning. Right? A new global religion is emerging, and we’re early to the party.
>
> The exciting thing is that all of these aspects mapped to the different spheres are coming into being. Now. The galaxy brains linked throughout this text are busy tackling different aspects and are gathering communities and resources around themselves. Powerful psycho-technologies from yoga to meditation and psychedelics are entering the mainstream. More beautiful (and truthful) narratives than the old “infected monkeys on a small speck of dust lost in an infinity of empty space” are gaining hold. The AI community has realized that human alignment is the true alignment problem. Web3 is building new technologies for global coordination (when they are not busy scamming each other)." - [Transforming cultures and selves, by Octopusyarn](https://octopusyarn.substack.com/p/transforming-cultures-and-selves)

> "Although political legitimacy demands accountability to an electoral process, those living in a democracy readily submit to what sociologist Michael Schudson calls the permanent embarrassment of expertise." - [Wiki-Government - How open-source technology can make government decision-making more expert and more democratic](https://democracyjournal.org/magazine/7/wiki-government/)

> "New technology may be changing the relationship between democracy and expertise, affording an opportunity to improve competence by making good information available for better governance. Large-scale knowledge-sharing projects, such as the Wikipedia online encyclopedia, and volunteer software-programming initiatives, such as the Apache Webserver (which runs two-thirds of the websites in the world), demonstrate the inadequacy of our assumptions about expertise in the twenty-first century. Ordinary people, regardless of institutional affiliation or professional status, possess information–serious, expert, fact-based, scientific information–to enhance decision-making, information not otherwise available to isolated bureaucrats. Partly as a result of the simple tools now available for collaboration and partly as a result of a highly mobile labor market of "knowledge workers," people are ready and willing to share that information across geographic, disciplinary, and institutional boundaries." - [Wiki-Government - How open-source technology can make government decision-making more expert and more democratic](https://democracyjournal.org/magazine/7/wiki-government/)

> "Speaking truth to power is easiest to do–and more accurate–when spoken not as an individual, but as a group. This has particular application to policymaking: Non-governmental participants have something more to offer than voting once a year–namely, good information. In much the same way that we devise legal procedures to ensure fairness in the courtroom or open deliberation in Congress, we can design technology–and the legal and policy framework to support it–that elicits specific, structured, and manageable input, not from individuals, but from collaborative groups. If we can harness the enthusiasm and knowledge of "netizens" to the legal and political processes generally reserved for citizens, we can produce government decision-making that is both more expert and, at the same time, more democratic." - [Wiki-Government - How open-source technology can make government decision-making more expert and more democratic](https://democracyjournal.org/magazine/7/wiki-government/)

> "It turns out that professional status has much less bearing on the quality of information than we might assume, and that professionals–whether in politics or other domains–are notoriously unsuccessful at making informed predictions. Moreover, the traditional reliance on institutionalized expertise is fraught with political controversy. Sometimes these pre-selected scientists and outside experts are simply lobbyists passing by another name." - [Wiki-Government - How open-source technology can make government decision-making more expert and more democratic](https://democracyjournal.org/magazine/7/wiki-government/)

> "We want to design practices for "collaborative governance," shared processes of responsibility in information-gathering and decision-making that combine the technical expertise of public experts with the legal standards of professional decision-makers. There are plenty of people with expertise to share if their knowledge can successfully be connected to those decision-makers who need it. It is not necessary to pre-select authenticated and known professionals when structures can be put in place to ensure that informational inputs are discernable, specific, well-labeled, and easy to search, sort, and use. An online system will not be without its own problems and abuses, but the assumption is that greater public participation, not in setting values but in supplying information or making sense of and connections between informational sources supplied by others, can substantively improve decision-making." - [Wiki-Government - How open-source technology can make government decision-making more expert and more democratic](https://democracyjournal.org/magazine/7/wiki-government/)

> "Our institutions of governance are characterized by a longstanding culture of professionalism in which bureaucrats–not citizens–are the experts. Until recently, we have viewed this arrangement as legitimate because we have not practically been able to argue otherwise. Now we have a chance to do government differently. We have the know-how to create "civic software" that will help us form groups and communities who, working together, can be more effective at informing decision-making than individuals working alone. We know from James Surowiecki’s book, The Wisdom of Crowds, as well as Simon and Schuster’s new MediaPredict project (which encourages readers to guess which manuscripts will become best-sellers), that technology can be used to aggregate predictions. But Peer- to-Patent is teaching us that we can go beyond the tallying of votes. While the general public has good instincts about value-based decisions and could be engaged betterto identify "big mistakes" (such as egregiously unfair media ownership rules), there are specific people out there who possess specific information about patents or trucks or chemicals whom we can now incorporate into our decision-making.
>
> Nor does it have to stop at patents. Scientists who currently give their time to review grant applications might be just as willing to contribute their knowledge to decision-making about the environment, transportation, nuclear power, and agriculture. Frequent travelers have useful information to share with homeland security officials about how to best organize security at airports. Economists, businesspeople, and lawyers know a great deal about financial markets, securities, and consumer protection. State Department officials do not possess better information than select graduate students in computer science about RFID chips for passports. Immigrants and welfare recipients have information based on lived as well as learned experience to contribute.
>
> In order to make it possible for ordinary, busy people to participate, and for government to make use of their knowledge, government must design the practices of public participation to enable groups, not just individuals, to participate. Agencies must crystallize the questions they ask of the public and embed those targeted practices into software. Of course, not even the best-designed civic software is going to stop government from making bad decisions or ignoring–willfully or otherwise–good information dropped in its lap. And there will be manipulation and gaming, to be sure. But these are not reasons to shy away from opening up the practices of governance, especially when those practices can evolve over time to respond to problems that may arise.
>
> Opening up closed decision-making also introduces a greater degree of transparency and accountability than we have had before. For example, even if Peer-to-Patent does not yield good research or prior art every time, many eyeballs on the application still encourage the inventor to do a better job of writing it and produce public debate and discussion about the application. It drives more information into the open and encourages the "liberation" of government data, not for its own sake, but as an enabler for engagement. And public involvement reminds the agency official that he is working for (and being watched by) the public." - [Wiki-Government - How open-source technology can make government decision-making more expert and more democratic](https://democracyjournal.org/magazine/7/wiki-government/)

> "With new forms of digital institution-building, we have an opportunity to increase the legitimacy of governmental decisions. The tools–increasingly cheap, sometimes free–will not replace the professionals. Technology will not, by itself, make complex regulatory problems any more tractable, or eliminate partisan disputes about values. What this next generation of civic software can do, however, is introduce better information by enabling the expert public to contribute targeted information. In doing so, it can make possible practices of governance that are, at once, more expert and more democratic." - [Wiki-Government - How open-source technology can make government decision-making more expert and more democratic](https://democracyjournal.org/magazine/7/wiki-government/)

> "This is the real force behind globalization: the observation that social, economical and cultural processes no longer are impeded by geographical borders or distances, but cover the world as a whole. This is most clear on the Internet, where you can exchange information virtually instantaneously, without being aware whether your correspondent is situated around the corner, or on the other side of the planet." - [Accelerating Socio-Technological Evolution: from ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/AcceleratingEvolution.pdf)

> "The problem of overcoming the conflicts intrinsic to competitive relations is exemplified by the Prisoners’ Dilemma and the Tragedy of the Commons. In different situations, different solutions have typically evolved. However, these solutions are all related, in the sense that they can be viewed as institutions in the broadest sense of the word, i.e. as socially agreed-upon systems of rules and control mechanisms for enforcing them, that regulate and coordinate interactions between agents so as to minimize friction and maximize synergy." - [Accelerating Socio-Technological Evolution: from ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/AcceleratingEvolution.pdf)

> "After a while, the network of trails will have stabilized so that individual animals only need to contribute a minimal effort to its maintenance. Thus, the influence of individual agents on the medium tends to decrease. On the other hand, as the network becomes more reliable and extensive, the influence of the medium on the agents’ activities increases. Eventually, the asymmetry is inverted: where initially we would see the agents as manipulating the medium, now it becomes more parsimonious to see the medium as directing the agents. The medium has turned into a mediator: it coordinates the individual activities so as to minimize friction or conflict, and to maximize synergy. The classic example of such an “active” coordination medium can be found in the pheromone trails that ants create while searching for food. The trail network functions like an external memory or “collective mental map” for the ant colony, directing the individual ants to the different food sources and the nest via the most efficient routes." - [Accelerating Socio-Technological Evolution: from ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/AcceleratingEvolution.pdf)

> "There are limits to the reduction of physical friction: it becomes increasingly difficult to reduce the consumption of matter and energy simply because there is a minimal amount of matter/energy necessary for processes like feeding, movement, and construction. On the other hand, there is no clear limit to the reduction of informational or social friction, in that the losses of frictional interactions (negative - 12 -sum) can be turned into the gains of synergetic interactions (positive sum)." - [Accelerating Socio-Technological Evolution: from ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/AcceleratingEvolution.pdf)

> "The remarkable efficiency of the Internet is at present still mostly physical or informational, not social. The Internet has grown so quickly that it has not had the time to evolve efficient institutions, i.e. collective systems of rules that coordinate individual actions. The result is a messy, confusing and constantly changing information landscape, that in principle offers immense benefits, but in practice only works reliably for a limited number of applications, while producing confusion, information overload, and various forms of “cybercrime”. As a result, an individual discovery published on the net may indeed change the world’s outlook within days, but the more likely outcome is that it will get buried within masses of other, mostly much less relevant information, and not receive the attention it deserves.
>
> In conclusion, the evolutionary dynamics underlying globalization has already led to a relatively efficient physical distribution of matter, energy and information across the globe, but still needs to produce the social institutions that go with it. This is not a very original observation: critics of the globalization of markets have pointed out that the extension of the free trade in goods and services needs to be counterbalanced by the further development of transnational institutions, such as UN, UNESCO, WHO, etc., to protect the rights of children, workers, consumers, cultural groups or the environment. The “stigmergic” theory proposed here, however, suggests a number of complementary mechanisms through which new types of institutions are likely to evolve.
>
> The main idea is that the external interaction medium, a role that is increasingly dominated by the Internet, will evolve into a mediator. This mediator will not only facilitate, but direct, and eventually control, interactions so as to maximize their synergy. To achieve that, the medium needs to develop a form of intelligent management of the communication processes it supports, leading to what may be called collective intelligence or distributed cognition. When this distributed intelligence spans the world, the resulting system may be called the Global Brain." - [Accelerating Socio-Technological Evolution: from ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/AcceleratingEvolution.pdf)

> "Quantitative stigmergy ranks or prioritizes existing possibilities for action, thus helping agents to choose the action that is most likely to be beneficial. Qualitative stigmergy creates potential for action by changing the medium in such a way that novel possibilities arise." - [Accelerating Socio-Technological Evolution: from ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/AcceleratingEvolution.pdf)

> "The basic mechanism whereby useful paths are gradually reinforced, and less useful ones weakened, provides a very general heuristic to tackle a variety of problems. It can be seen as a quantitative, stigmergic instantiation of the mechanism of evolution itself: maintain and grow the fit (useful); reduce, and eventually eliminate, the unfit...
>
> Furthermore, the same mechanism seems to underlie learning in the brain: neuronal connections that are successfully used become stronger; the others become weaker. It is this analogy that initially inspired me to conceive of the World-Wide Web as a potential Global Brain. The web is a distributed network of documents connected by hyperlinks along which people travel (“surf”) from page to page... when people surfing the web end up in a particularly interesting page, they are likely to create one or more new links from their own pages pointing directly to it, thus shortcutting the long sequence they followed before finding it. This increases the number of links to the page, and the probability that other people would encounter it. The overall effect is captured by Google’s PageRank algorithm, which provides a measure of the importance of a website as determined by the links directly or indirectly pointing to it. This is another example of quantitative stigmergy: the actions of many independent agents (people inserting links) on a shared medium (the web) produce a collective ranking (PageRank) that helps other agents find the options (documents) most likely to be useful to them." - [Accelerating Socio-Technological Evolution: from ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/AcceleratingEvolution.pdf)

> "Agent swarms can perform not only the equivalent of intuitive, subconscious processes of activation spreading through the brain, but of systematic, logical search and deduction. To achieve that, the knowledge in the web needs to be organized according to a consensual ontology, i.e. a formal system of categories and relationships. Developing such ontologies is the goal of the Semantic Web project. Given such a semantic network, a software agent could be programmed with a “grammar” of rules that tell it to only explore or return certain categories of nodes and links. A swarm of such agents should for example be able to find all birds that do not fly, or the most representative researchers (as measured e.g. by PageRank or citation impact) who have written about globalization and evolution, cite publications of Modelski, work in one of the NATO countries and have a PhD, so that you can invite them to your NATO-sponsored workshop.
>
> In conclusion, quantitative stigmergy is able to turn the web from a passive medium for communication and storage of information into an intelligent mediator that uses learning and inference mechanisms similar to those of the human brain to recommend to its users the actions, information sources, or people most likely to be helpful for their aims. To achieve this, the intelligent web draws on the experience and knowledge of its users collectively, as externalized in the “trace” of preferences they leave on the paths they have traveled." - [Accelerating Socio-Technological Evolution: from ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/AcceleratingEvolution.pdf)

> "A major effect of stigmergy is the acceleration of evolution: a solution to an evolutionary problem found by one agent can now, by impressing it upon the medium, be used and improved by other agents. Since the medium benefits all agents’ fitness, there will be a selective pressure on the agents to find solutions that make the medium itself more powerful. The further the medium extends, and the easier it becomes for agents to interact with it, the quicker innovations will spread and undergo further improvements. This leads to a self-reinforcing process: improvement of the medium facilitates further innovation, which in turn helps improve the medium." - [Accelerating Socio-Technological Evolution: from ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/AcceleratingEvolution.pdf)

> "Connectivity implies an increase in the number of agents one is interacting with, and therefore an increase in social complexity, with the concomitant threats of competition, conflict, and confusion. These problems too can be conceptualized most generally as a form of friction, i.e. the (generally unintended) obstruction of one agent’s actions by one or more other agents’ actions. As in the case of technological progress, the trial-and-error of evolution will tend to reduce this social friction by creating adapted institutions. Institutions, or more generally mediators, are systems that coordinate the activities of different agents so as to minimize friction and maximize synergy.
>
> A largely overlooked, but very powerful, mechanism for the spontaneous evolution of mediators is stigmergy, which relies on the medium or environment shared by the agents. Stigmergic interaction means that the change produced by one agent to the medium stimulates another agent to perform a complementary action, promoting their collective benefit even without any conscious intention to cooperate. Stigmergic activity will gradually reshape the passive medium into an active mediator, which elicits and directs the agents’ actions.
>
> The most “ephemeralized” example of the technological infrastructure underlying global connectivity is the Internet. A quick inspection shows that it provides a near ideal medium for stigmergic interaction: it instantaneously connects people all across the planet, is nearly always and everywhere available, can be used virtually without cost, is plastic enough to accommodate practically any “shape” or information that is imprinted upon it, while it will accurately register and store this information for as long as necessary. What it still lacks are the more evolved mediator functions. Yet, there already exist several examples of Internet services—such as the Google search engine or the Wikipedia website—that very successfully apply stigmergic principles to coordinate individual activities, thus offering their users a form of distributed intelligence well beyond the capabilities of a single individual.
>
> A straightforward extrapolation of this evolution that injects ever more intelligence into the Internet leads me to expect a near-term shift from World-Wide Web to Global Brain. The “Global Brain” is more than a fancy term for a large-scale intelligent system, though: the analogy runs much deeper. An analysis of the stigmergic mechanisms that seem most effective in supporting such distributed intelligence shows that they are virtually identical to the mechanisms used by the human brain. The quantitative stigmergy exemplified by “ant algorithms” is nearly identical to the process of Hebbian or reinforcement learning that differentially strengthens connections between neurons in the brain. The “ants” that trace and explore the quantitatively weighted network formed in this way correspond to human or software agents searching the web, or to bursts of activation spreading across the brain. Qualitative stigmergy, which is the true motor of innovation, can be seen as the basis of symbolic consciousness in the brain. It is exemplified on the web by a variety of collaborative, “open access” sites where people freely improve on each other’s contributions." - [Accelerating Socio-Technological Evolution: from ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/AcceleratingEvolution.pdf)

> "Modern democratic political institutions are based on a decision-­‐making system that is both inefficient and corrupt, as it seems to enhance the proliferation and implementation of ideas that benefit only political leaders, upper-­‐class individuals, and multi-­‐national corporations. Fortunately, this system is also unnecessary given advances in information and communication technologies (ICT) and the emergence of Web 2.0 features that enhance collective intelligence on the Internet. Several theorists have proposed alternative models of governance that can broadly be categorized as “e-­‐democracies”. These models have been met with incredulity and resistance from policymakers, despite impressive theoretical developments, practical demonstrations, and empirical testing of their ability to maximize the collective intelligence of our societies. Broadly speaking, most “e-­‐ democracy” models are built within a framework of three pillars: (1) distributed decision-­‐making, (2) digitally-­‐based social mediums, and (3) a new paradigm of collaborative democracy. Therefore, the dominant models proposed to replace our current democratic systems can be referred to as a Distributed Digital Democracy (DDD)." - [Distributed Digital Democracy (DDD), by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2012/12/distributed-digital-democracy.pdf)

> "" - [Distributed Digital Democracy (DDD), by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2012/12/distributed-digital-democracy.pdf)

> "Today we find ourselves in a similar situation to those who pushed for a new system organization during the Industrial Revolution. I believe the evolution of human governance institutions, as well as contemporary political, social, and technological theory, suggests very clearly that we need a new governing system altogether. " - [Distributed Digital Democracy (DDD), by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2012/12/distributed-digital-democracy.pdf)

> "" - [Distributed Digital Democracy (DDD), by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2012/12/distributed-digital-democracy.pdf)

> "" - [Distributed Digital Democracy (DDD), by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2012/12/distributed-digital-democracy.pdf)

> "" - [Distributed Digital Democracy (DDD), by Cadell Last](https://cadelllast.files.wordpress.com/2012/12/distributed-digital-democracy.pdf)

> "Wikipedia suffers somewhat from a lack of easy transparency. The internal politics and decisions of the cabal of high­ranking Wikipedia editors is opaque to most Wikipedia users. So, for example, Wikipedia pages on controversial topics such as transhumanism or psi can be “hijacked” by zealots with strong opinions, in a way that is hard for the ordinary reader to trace. One can read the discussion on a Wikipedia talk page, but one can’t easily tell who a page’s controlling editor is – how much they actually know about the topic in question, what their history of judgment or opinion on the topic is, etc." - [The Global Brain and the Emerging Economy of Abundance: Mutualism, Open Collaboration, Exchange Networks and the Automated Commons](https://goertzel.org/OpenCollaboration.pdf)

> "In contemporary, scarcity­era societies, most people find ongoing monitoring of commons­usage a hassle. To the degree the hassle can be minimized via transparent value chains and easy­to­use value chain inspection tools, people's best instincts and deepest compassion can be more frequently brought to bear on issues of commons usage." - [The Global Brain and the Emerging Economy of Abundance: Mutualism, Open Collaboration, Exchange Networks and the Automated Commons](https://goertzel.org/OpenCollaboration.pdf)

> "The general vibe of economic interaction would be one of inspecting and understanding the exchanges implicit in one’s choices – be these exchanges with other people or with common natural, physical or informational resources – rather than one of considering exchanges as isolated transactions of money for goods or services without any richer contextual meaning." - [The Global Brain and the Emerging Economy of Abundance: Mutualism, Open Collaboration, Exchange Networks and the Automated Commons](https://goertzel.org/OpenCollaboration.pdf)

> "This sort of global brain would keep global aims (regarding common resources) in mind, and make recommendations to individuals regarding ways to fulfill their individual desires while also serving global aims effectively. It would also guide people to think more pro­socially and to engage in I­You interactions with others and with their physical, natural and informational environment. It would not interfere with people's right to make any sort of offers and requests they like (though of course societal laws might forbid certain offers); but it would nudge people's behavior in certain directions.
>
> In current society individuals’ choices are most commonly nudged via advertising, which has the key goal of maximizing shareholder value for large corporations, i.e. of accelerating the concentration of wealth in a small fraction of the population, and directing people's minds toward acts of consumption. Nudging people in the direction of I­You interactions and collectively positive growth and development of common resources does not seem inferior." - [The Global Brain and the Emerging Economy of Abundance: Mutualism, Open Collaboration, Exchange Networks and the Automated Commons](https://goertzel.org/OpenCollaboration.pdf)

> "Rather than posing as the sole creator of the product, the entrepreneur appears explicitly as the seed of a creative process carried out by a subnetwork of the Global Brain. Of course, something like this is already the case ­­ products already emerge from collective activity in self­organizing distributed networks of humans, machines and organizations. But the tendency toward secrecy and hierarchical organization, enforced by (among other factors) the key economic role played by businesses with a central goal of competitively maximizing shareholder value, places the focus on processes occurring within organizations and individuals rather than on distributed network activities. In the Open Collaboration/Exchange Networks approach, interactions occur among individuals ­­ and organizations form based on explicit exchanges between individuals ­­ and this allows higher­level patterns of organization and adaptation to become more complex and explicit.
>
> The only “middleman” involved, in the Open Collaboration/Exchange Network scenario, is the software mediating the matching and distribution of offers and requests, the formation of teams, the inspection of chains and the assignment of reputations. This, however, can be open­source software running peer­to­peer, or using cloud­compute time obtained via offer­network exchange with users. Donations from users of the software would likely be more than enough to fund an open­source development team maintaining and improving the software. Multiple coopeting versions of the software may exist, much like multiple Linux versions today." - [The Global Brain and the Emerging Economy of Abundance: Mutualism, Open Collaboration, Exchange Networks and the Automated Commons](https://goertzel.org/OpenCollaboration.pdf)

> "Mathematically, one may say that human beings’ value systems are “partial orderings” – they allow a person to say whether X is more valuable than Y, in a certain context. But money requires something stronger than this – it requires the arrangement of all entities to be valued in a “total ordering”, so that any X and Y can be compared as to their relative values. This has the merit of simplicity; it allows values to be arranged along a number line, so that one can assign each entity whose value is of concern a single number representing its value. But it has the shortcoming of not actually agreeing with the way human minds think and feel about values. In a partial ordering, mathematically, two entities X and Y may simply be incommensurable. NRdimensional vectors (for N>1) are like this; it doesn’t always mean something to say that vector X is “greater than” vector Y. In a value system that is a partial but not total ordering, there may be entities X and Y whose values are incommensurable – there is no clear answer regarding whether X is more valuable than Y or vice versa. This is how human value systems work, even though it’s not how money works." - [Offer Networks, a Potential Infrastructure for a Post-Money Economy, by Ben Goertzel](https://globalbraininstitute.github.io/onet/files/offer_networks.pdf)

> "Using Offer Networks, people would be able to get what they need and some of what they want, and offer what they are willing and able to, without having to pass all their preferences and values through the single dimension of cash value." - [Offer Networks, a Potential Infrastructure for a Post-Money Economy, by Ben Goertzel](https://globalbraininstitute.github.io/onet/files/offer_networks.pdf)

> "Reputation management could end up being the most complex part of an Offer Network system – much as fraud detection is the most complex part of a system like PayPal." - [Offer Networks, a Potential Infrastructure for a Post-Money Economy, by Ben Goertzel](https://globalbraininstitute.github.io/onet/files/offer_networks.pdf)

> "There is a surface parallel between Offer Networks and old-style socialist ideas about computer-controlled centrally planned economies. In these old ideas, as in Offer Networks, a massive integrative system was often posited to balance everyoneus desires against each other. But a critical difference is that, in the Offer Networks approach the clearinghouse doesnut try to determine what anybodyus needs or abilities are. Instead, people specify their offers based on their own value systems; and the clearinghouse just mediates the transactions, in a way that respects the various individualsu desires and values insofar as they have articulated them within their exchange offers." - [Offer Networks, a Potential Infrastructure for a Post-Money Economy, by Ben Goertzel](https://globalbraininstitute.github.io/onet/files/offer_networks.pdf)

> "Why are we willing to work so hard at things we don’t like doing, in order to buy so many things we don’t need? Part of the answer is addiction – we become psychologically addicted to certain routines and possessions, e.g. eating out in restaurants instead of cooking at home, or driving in a private car instead of taking public transport, or the feeling of wearing new & different clothes or jewelry. And part of the answer is social status. Having a lot of money is itself an indicator of high social status; and money can be used to buy other status indicators. A tremendous amount of money is spent on status symbols of one sort or another. Of course, money is not the only status indicator. Einstein had a very high status in the public eye, yet was not terribly rich. The same for Linux Torvalds. But overall, money is surely the best single proxy for social status in modern societies." - [Offer Networks, a Potential Infrastructure for a Post-Money Economy, by Ben Goertzel](https://globalbraininstitute.github.io/onet/files/offer_networks.pdf)

> "It seems possible that a well-tuned collaborative reputation assignment network could suffice to assign credit to individuals for their contribution to the overall doings of an Open Value Network. " - [Offer Networks, a Potential Infrastructure for a Post-Money Economy, by Ben Goertzel](https://globalbraininstitute.github.io/onet/files/offer_networks.pdf)

> "The most simple and common definition of intelligence is the ability to solve problems. A problem can be defined as a difference between the present situation (the initial state), and an ideal or desired situation (the goal state or solution). Problem solving then means finding a path through the “problem space” that leads from the initial state (say, x) to the goal (say, y). This requires determining the right sequence of steps that leads from x to y." - [Challenge Propagation: towards a mathematical theory of distributed intelligence and the Global Brain, by Francis Heylighen]()

> "Intelligence is highly context-dependent: more important than the absolute number of problems you can solve, is whether you can solve the most significant problems in your present environment. Adding the capability to solve some purely theoretical problems that are of no use in your present or future environment will in general not increase your fitness (i.e. probability of long-term survival)—and may even decrease it if it would make you waste time on contemplating irrelevant issues." - [Challenge Propagation: towards a mathematical theory of distributed intelligence and the Global Brain, by Francis Heylighen]()

> "The simplest model of intelligence is a look-up table or mapping. This is a list of condition-action rules, of the form: if your problem is x, then the (action you need to perform to attain the) solution is y. In short: if x, then y, or, even shorter: x → y." - [Challenge Propagation: towards a mathematical theory of distributed intelligence and the Global Brain, by Francis Heylighen]()

> "The next, more complex model of intelligence is a deterministic algorithm. This is a fixed-length or iterated sequence of actions that need to be performed on the initial state, until the state they produce satisfies the condition for being a solution." - [Challenge Propagation: towards a mathematical theory of distributed intelligence and the Global Brain, by Francis Heylighen]()

> "The view of problem solving as computation or as heuristic search seems to imply a sequential process, in which the different steps are performed one by one. A first step in our intended generalization towards distributed, parallel processes is the reinterpretation of problem solving as information processing. The initial state or problem statement can be interpreted as a piece of information received by the agent. The solution of the problem is a new piece of information produced by the agent in response to the problem statement. The task of the intelligent agent is then to transform or process the input information (problem, initial state, “question”) via a number of intermediate stages into the output information (solution, goal state, “answer”)." - [Challenge Propagation: towards a mathematical theory of distributed intelligence and the Global Brain, by Francis Heylighen]()

> "Compared to the sequential models of intelligence, neural networks have two big advantages:
>
> 1) processing happens in a parallel, distributed manner, making it more robust and flexible;
>
> 2) the network does not need an explicit program to know how it should function: it can learn from experience.
>
> The distributed character of neural networks means that its information and “knowledge” are not localized in a single component: they are spread out across all the nodes and links, which together contribute to the final solution. This makes the processing much more robust: individual components may be missing, malfunctioning or contain errors; yet, the disturbances this introduces to the process are drowned out by the contributions from the other components when everything is aggregated. In a sequential process, on the other hand, every step or component through which the process passes constitutes a bottleneck: if that component breaks down, the process may never recover.
>
> The learning happens via a general “reward” or reinforcement mechanism: links that have been successfully used in producing a good solution become stronger; the others become weaker. After many experiences of successful or failed processing, the relative strengths of the different connections will have shifted so that the probability of overall success has become much larger. This intrinsically simple mechanism only works for complex problems because of the distributed character of the processing: if only the process as a whole could be rewarded or punished, this would not produce enough information for it to learn a complex, subtle procedure consisting of many different actions collaborating towards a global solution. Because the process is distributed, its components can learn individually, so that the one can be reinforced at the same time as its neighbor is weakened, thus rebalancing their relative contributions." - [Challenge Propagation: towards a mathematical theory of distributed intelligence and the Global Brain, by Francis Heylighen]()

> "The view of intelligence as a capability for problem solving or information processing runs into a fundamental issue: what is a meaningful problem, or meaningful information? Why should an intelligent agent address certain problems or process certain information, and disregard others? In other words, how does an agent decide what to do or pay attention to? In the approach of traditional artificial intelligence (AI), this issue is ignored, as AI programs are conceived essentially as question-answering systems: the user or programmer introduces the question (problem, query, input), and the program responds with an answer (solution, output).
>
> On the other hand, the issue becomes inevitable once you start to design autonomous systems, i.e. systems that should be able to act intelligently in the absence of an instructor telling them what to do. Such a system should at least have a value system, i.e. a set of explicit or implicit criteria that allow it distinguish “good” outcomes from “bad” ones. Given the ability to evaluate or value phenomena, the agent can then itself decide what aspects of its situation are “problematic” and therefore require some solution." - [Challenge Propagation: towards a mathematical theory of distributed intelligence and the Global Brain, by Francis Heylighen]()

> "The difference between positive (growth) and negative (deficiency) values roughly corresponds to the difference between positive and negative emotions. Negative emotions (e.g. fear, anger, or sadness) occur when a need is frustrated or threatened, i.e. when the agent encounters a perturbation that it may not be able to compensate. Positive emotions (e.g. joy, love, curiosity) on the other hand, function to broaden your domain of interest and build up cognitive, material, or social resources. In other words, they motivate you to connect, explore, play, seek challenges, learn, experience, etc. Negative emotions tend to narrowly focus your attention to the problem at hand, so that you can invest all your resources in tackling that problem; positive emotions tend to widen your field of attention so that it becomes open to discovering new opportunities for growth.
>
> A general theory of values should encompass both positive or growth values, and negative or deficiency values. The present paper will not further develop such a theory. Yet, it is worth pointing out that such a theory would be an important contribution to a general model of intelligence and of the global brain, and therefore definitely worth investigating. Some inspiration can be found in the various psychological theories of motivation or needs, which include fundamental needs/values such as security, social affiliation, achievement and knowledge. More generally, from an evolutionary perspective, all values can be derived from the fundamental value of fitness (survival, development, and reproduction), since natural selection has ensured that agents that did not successfully strive for fitness have been eliminated from the scene." - [Challenge Propagation: towards a mathematical theory of distributed intelligence and the Global Brain, by Francis Heylighen]()

> "Valence can be understood as the subjective appreciation by an agent of the global utility, well-being or fitness offered by a particular phenomenon or situation. It can be formalized as a scalar variable, which is larger than zero for positive situations, smaller than zero for negative ones, and zero for neutral or indifferent ones." - [Challenge Propagation: towards a mathematical theory of distributed intelligence and the Global Brain, by Francis Heylighen]()

> "A challenge is a situation that carries valence for an agent, so that the agent is inclined to act, in the case of negative valence by suppressing the perceived disturbance(s), in the case of positive valence by exploring or exploiting the perceived opportunity(ies). More concisely, we can define a challenge as a phenomenon that invites action from an agent. Negative challenges correspond to what we have called problems; positive challenges represent affordances for growth or progress. But note that these are not opposites but independent dimensions, since a challenge can carry both positive and negative valences. For example, for a hunter, encounter with a wild boar is both an opportunity, since a wild boar has tasty meat, and a problem, since a wild boar is dangerous. For a company, a free trade agreement can be both positive, since it gives access to new clients, and negative, since it opens the door to new competitors. A challenge incites action because it represents a situation in which not acting will lead to an overall lower fitness than acting—because the agent gains fitness by taking action, loses fitness by not taking action, or both. Thus, a challenge can be seen as a promise of fitness gain for action relative to inaction.
>
> However, a challenge merely inspires or stimulates action, it does not impose it. The reason is that a complex situation will typically present many challenging phenomena, and the agent will not be able to act on all of them. For example, someone surfing the web typically encounters many pages that seem worth investigating, but obviously cannot read all of them. We may assume that an agent is intrinsically capable of choice, and that this choice will be determined partly by subjective preferences, partly by situational influences, partly by chance, i.e. intrinsically unpredictable, “random” fluctuations. Therefore, it is in general impossible to determine exactly how an agent will react to a situation, although it should be possible to derive statistical regularities about the most common choices. The implication for modeling is that an agent should not be represented as a deterministic automaton, but as a stochastic system, which may make different decisions in apparently identical cases, but where it is meaningful to specify conditional probabilities for the different choices, so that in a given condition e.g. 50% of agents can be expected to make choice A, 30% choice B, and 20% choice C.
>
> One of the reasons for this unpredictability is that agents have bounded rationality19: they normally never have all the information or cognitive abilities necessary to evaluate the different challenges. They, therefore have to make “informed guesses” about the best course of action to take. Moreover, assuming that similar agents tend to look for similar resources, it is worth making a choice different from the choice of the others, so as to avoid competition for scarce resources. In addition to positivity and negativity, other dimensions worth considering in order to compare challenges are:
>
> - prospect (in how far can the agent foresee the different aspects or implications of the challenge?),
>
> - difficulty (how much effort would be involved in tackling the challenge?), and
>
> - mystery (in how far would tackling this challenge increase the agent’s prospect concerning other challenges?)." - [Challenge Propagation: towards a mathematical theory of distributed intelligence and the Global Brain, by Francis Heylighen]()

> "A difference between simple relaxation models and challenge models is that intelligent agents (as living or artificial systems), unlike physical systems, must remain in a far-from-equilibrium state: they are constantly active, consuming energy, and trying to avoid at all costs a complete standstill (i.e. death). Therefore, while they are inclined to relax existing challenges, they will also seek new challenges (affordances, resources, opportunities), unlike physical systems. In that sense, a “challenge relaxing” dynamics only describes part of their behavior, and must be complemented by a “challenge seeking” dynamics that is better described by some form of active exploration. This is the equivalent of what we have called positive or growth values. It is illustrated in the brain by the fact that thinking never stops: activation does not simply diffuse until it fades away; action potentials are continuously generated by the brain itself, even in the absence of outside stimuli that play the role of challenges needing to be relaxed." - [Challenge Propagation: towards a mathematical theory of distributed intelligence and the Global Brain, by Francis Heylighen]()

> "The challenge seeking dynamics can be represented by the fact that the agents are constantly confronted by a variety of new challenges, and that they are motivated to pick out the most challenging one of those as soon as the previous challenge has been relaxed. These challenges have an external origin: they are produced by the agent’s environment (which includes other agents as well as the natural and technological environment). We may assume that this environment is in a constant flux, so that agents are “showered” with challenging phenomena. Each of those is an opportunity to extract valence by acting." - [Challenge Propagation: towards a mathematical theory of distributed intelligence and the Global Brain, by Francis Heylighen]()

> "Challenges have been defined as “invitations” to act, which means that the agent is not forced to take up the invitation. This is necessary because in general many challenges vie for an agent’s attention, and not all can be taken up. This becomes particularly clear if we imagine a hunter-gatherer exploring a stretch of rain forest with its thousands of varied stimuli, or a person surfing the web with it millions of potentially interesting pages. The agent’s capabilities for cognitive processing and action are limited, and therefore a selection must be made between these myriads of potentially important challenges. A model of challenge propagation ideally should include a system of selection criteria and mechanisms that help the agent single out the most significant challenges—however, without assuming that there is a single most important one.
>
> Some work that may be of help here is Baars’s model of consciousness, which assumes that within the brain many stimuli and thoughts compete for attention. However, only a single one can be amplified to the degree that it comes to dominate the “global workspace” that interconnects all the more specialized brain regions. From this workspace, the thoughts selected to be most important for conscious attention are “broadcasted” to the whole brain. This model presupposes a positive feedback mechanism where strongly activated thoughts become even stronger, while suppressing weaker ones, until a single “winner” remains. This is an example of the “winner-takes-it-all” dynamic common in non-linear, self- organizing systems. The suppression requires a mechanism of neural inhibition that may use some form of negative activation.
>
> Research on attention and consciousness (see my lecture notes on “Cognitive Systems” for a review) points to unexpectedness and valence as major criteria for winning the competition: stimuli that are surprising, and/or that are highly relevant for the present goal tend to attract most attention. The valence criterion is most obvious, as challenges that promise a higher reward than others deserve more attention." - [Challenge Propagation: towards a mathematical theory of distributed intelligence and the Global Brain, by Francis Heylighen]()

> "We are left with three fundamental criteria for deciding which challenges are most worth attending to: valence, surprise, and clarity. An agent is most likely to act on a challenge that entails high value (large potential gains or losses), that is mysterious, unusual or surprising, and where there is minimal uncertainty or ambiguity about how to act. Note that the surprise/mystery and clarity criteria at first sight may appear to be opposite. However, the uncertainty implied by surprise is one about the nature of the challenge (what is its true valence?), while the certainty implied by clarity is one about the choice of action (how should I deal with this challenge?). These are not contradictory, as an uncertain challenge (e.g. a mysterious envelope left on your doorstep) may well incite a clear action (e.g. open the envelope to see what it contains). It is clear that in such a case the challenge will have a high priority even though its valence is as yet unknown: you are likely to immediately open the envelope, even though you may be disappointed to see that it contains merely some irrelevant publicity. " - [Challenge Propagation: towards a mathematical theory of distributed intelligence and the Global Brain, by Francis Heylighen]()

> "Each agent dealing with a challenge will normally extract some benefit from it, while reducing some components, and leaving some others invariant. If we focus only on the invariant components, we get a model of information transmission similar to the spreading of memes: messages are passed on from agent to agent, without undergoing much change, until they have reached everyone that may be interested in the message. This could for example be a model of the diffusion of a particular innovation, fashion, or scientific theory.
>
> If we focus on the variable components, we get a model of the self-organization of workflow and division of labor: different agents perform different tasks that are part of a common challenge, and then pass on the remaining challenge to others with different skills and/or needs, up to the point where nothing of value is left to extract, i.e. all tasks have been done. To better understand such distributed processing of a challenge we will need to investigate the dynamics of propagation from agent to agent." - [Challenge Propagation: towards a mathematical theory of distributed intelligence and the Global Brain, by Francis Heylighen]()

> "There are two paradigmatic cases of challenge propagation: stigmergy and propagation across a network. In the case of stigmergy, a challenge remains available in a public medium or workspace that all agents can access. If an agent decides to take on the challenge, it will perform some actions that change the state of the challenge and then leaves the modified challenge in the medium. At a later stage, some other agent may pick up the modified challenge, and perform some further work on it, again leaving the “traces” of its work in the medium—where it can function as a challenge for some further agent. Here, the changes in the challenge in a sense propagate in time, but not in space, as they always remain available in the same place. The medium either has a trivial topology (there is only one “place”), or its topology does not directly affect the propagation from agent to agent.
>
> The other paradigmatic case is a social or neural network, in which a challenge moves from agent to agent by following the available links in the network. Here, the topology of the network (which node is connected to which other nodes) fundamentally determines the propagation process: a challenge can move directly from agent A to agent B only if there exists a link A → B in the network. In the stigmergic case, the challenge can move from any agent X to any agent Y, without constraints. The only requirement is that Y should “visit” the shared medium some time after X deposited its modified challenge there. An Internet example of stigmergy is Wikipedia, where any person can modify any page at any stage independently of which other person has contributed to that page. An Internet example of networked propagation is email, where A can pass a challenge on to B only if A has B’s email address, and B has enough trust in A to take on challenges from A—which typically only happens if A and B have a social or organizational connection." - [Challenge Propagation: towards a mathematical theory of distributed intelligence and the Global Brain, by Francis Heylighen]()

> "As a general rule of thumb, the most interesting networks to explore will be those that are most similar in structure to the “natural” networks that we find in social networks, the Internet, or the brain. These all tend to have the following properties:
>
> - recurrent (links are directed but can form loops or cycles)
>
> - small-world (two arbitrary nodes tend to be separated by not more than a small number of links)
>
> - clustering (two neighbors of a node tend to be connected to each other)
>
> - power-law (many nodes with few links, few nodes with many links)." - [Challenge Propagation: towards a mathematical theory of distributed intelligence and the Global Brain, by Francis Heylighen]()

> "The connection strength of a (multi)link expresses the probability that a challenge will be successfully propagated across that link, i.e. that an agent in the output set would take up the challenge proposed by an agent in the input set. Link strength can be formalized most simply as the conditional probability P(B|A) that agent B would take on a challenge received from agent A.
>
> This probability can depend on different properties of the communicative connection between agents, including: trust (the degree to which the receiving agent takes challenges coming via the link from the sending agent seriously), power (the degree to which the sending agent can compel the sending agent to act), friendship (the degree to which the receiving agent is eager to do something for the sending agent independently of any power relationships), friction (the effort or energy that it costs to transmit the challenge across the link) and bandwidth (the detail and clarity with which information can be transmitted along the link). Link strength therefore may represent any and all of these properties." - [Challenge Propagation: towards a mathematical theory of distributed intelligence and the Global Brain, by Francis Heylighen]()

> "Note that the success of the crossing (i.e. whether the receiving agent effectively addresses the challenge) depends first of all on that agent itself, that is, its selection criteria for relevance, and its capabilities for processing the challenge. The link strength merely represents the social-communicative aspect of the process, namely the relationship between sending and receiving agent determining in how far the receiving agent is likely to pay attention to the other’s challenges. If the two agents have a very weak relationship (like in two agents who don’t know each other but who both have read the same Wikipedia page), the probability of one picking up a challenge left by the other is a priori very low, and will be determined almost exclusively by the properties of the challenge and of the agents rather than by their relationship. However, this low probability may be compensated by the fact that the multilink connects a very large number of agents, so that at least one agent in the output set is likely to pick up the challenge." - [Challenge Propagation: towards a mathematical theory of distributed intelligence and the Global Brain, by Francis Heylighen]()

> "The intelligence of the network could then be equated with the speed of decrease in the average length for all challenge vectors present in the network: the more quickly the network can “relax” its various challenges, the smarter it is. This now allows us to compare many different variations of the model to see which ones exhibit most intelligence. Some obvious variations to investigate are:
>
> - different criteria used by the agents to select which challenges to address
>
> - different cognitive architectures (e.g. production rules or neural networks) for the agents
>
> - different hypergraph topologies (e.g. stigmergy vs. binary graphs)
>
> - different network topologies (e.g. hierarchical, clustering, power-law, etc.)
>
> - different rules for propagating the challenges across the links
>
> - different learning rules for changing the link weights in the network" - [Challenge Propagation: towards a mathematical theory of distributed intelligence and the Global Brain, by Francis Heylighen]()

> "While the development of such a model will still require a lot of research, the present analysis makes the problem much more tractable, by subdividing it into separate elements (such as challenge, agent and multilink), structures (such as topology of the network, or organization of the agents), processes (such as challenge selection, challenge processing, and challenge propagation), and measures (such as degree of relaxation, priority of a challenge, and overall intelligence)." - [Challenge Propagation: towards a mathematical theory of distributed intelligence and the Global Brain, by Francis Heylighen]()

http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/ChallengePropagation.pdf
http://pcp.vub.ac.be/Papers/ChallengePropagation-Spanda.pdf
http://cleamc11.vub.ac.be/papers/ChallengePropagation-Spanda.pdf
??? or not the spanda?

> "Intelligence is traditionally conceived as the ability to solve specific problems. We will here define it more generally as the ability to recognize and tackle challenges. A challenge is defined as an aspect of a situation that carries potential value. A challenge can be a problem to be solved (negative value) or an opportunity to be exploited (positive value), or some combination." - [The Offer Network Protocol: mathematical foundations and a roadmap for the development of a global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Roadmap-OfferNetwork.pdf)

> "The more diverse and the more complex the challenges a system can tackle, the more intelligent it is. Tackling challenges requires selecting and performing an appropriate combination of actions. Performing these actions provides the system with benefit relative to not performing them. Thus, the ultimate measure of intelligence is the amount of benefit or value that the system can obtain by effectively dealing with the challenges it encounters." - [The Offer Network Protocol: mathematical foundations and a roadmap for the development of a global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Roadmap-OfferNetwork.pdf)

> "A general utility function cannot even be defined, because the same thing will have one value in one context, and a different value in another context. This means that a true intelligence, which would make sense of its situation and dependably create value, must be open-ended, constantly adapting its preferences to a changing world, rather than having preprogrammed goals." - [The Offer Network Protocol: mathematical foundations and a roadmap for the development of a global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Roadmap-OfferNetwork.pdf)

> "All agents— whether human or technological—that are part of the system would express the challenges they experience. Negative challenges correspond to problems, desires, or needs, i.e. perceived deficiencies between what the agent has and what it ideally would like to have. Positive challenges correspond to resources, opportunities, or offers, i.e. perceived surpluses where the agent has something that could potentially satisfy a need. Because of the distributed character of value, challenges are not objectively classifiable as positive or negative." - [The Offer Network Protocol: mathematical foundations and a roadmap for the development of a global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Roadmap-OfferNetwork.pdf)

> "The offer network protocol needs to represent the fundamental components of coordinated action: agents, actions, prerequisite conditions, problems to be solved (which we will call needs), and (partial) solutions proposed (which we will call offers)." - [The Offer Network Protocol: mathematical foundations and a roadmap for the development of a global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Roadmap-OfferNetwork.pdf)

> "This motivating power of reputation can be increased by allowing people with a sufficiently high reputation to take more out of the system than they put in, thus profiting from unconditional offers. However, exploiting such gifts without adding anything in return should gradually reduce their reputation, so that they are not inclined to take out more than their fair share. This ensures that they do not turn into “free riders” that consistently abuse the system." - [The Offer Network Protocol: mathematical foundations and a roadmap for the development of a global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Roadmap-OfferNetwork.pdf)

> "Offer networks can also implement a more flexible form of social governance that has been called “libertarian paternalism”, “nudging”, or “mobilization”. The principle here is that there are no absolute obligations or prohibitions: everyone has the freedom to choose from the full range of available options. However, the options are arranged in such a way that the ones that are most beneficial to society (e.g. consuming vegetables, or taking courses) become easiest, most apparent or most attractive to choose, while those that are least beneficial (e.g. consuming tobacco, junk food or fossil fuels) require some special effort or motivation to go beyond the default choice. Socially beneficial “nudging” can be achieved by adding soft constraints that represent externalities, i.e. the costs and benefits to others of a transaction between private parties. These additional constraints would affect the order or priority of the solutions suggested by the offer network. For example, a less polluting option would get a higher priority even though it may fit the request somewhat less accurately. Like all other rules in the network, both legally binding and “nudging” rules should be made public and explicit, so that anyone can scrutinize them, evaluate them, criticize them, and if necessary propose alternatives." - [The Offer Network Protocol: mathematical foundations and a roadmap for the development of a global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Roadmap-OfferNetwork.pdf)

> "First, technologies that are initially formulated in a highly abstract, technical manner eventually get implemented in an intuitive, user-friendly manner, which requires minimal effort from their users. Second, when a system becomes truly useful, people become increasingly motivated to learn to use it in the most effective way, putting in the necessary time and effort to assimilate all the tips and tricks. Third, such usage eventually becomes part of general education—just like reading and writing evolved from highly technical activities performed by a small elite of experts to general skills expected from everybody. Finally, we already alluded to the virtuous cycle of stigmergy: the partial products (such as an incomplete Wikipedia article) of some, when clearly expressed in a common medium, stimulate and guide others to add their own contributions. Thus, contributions build on top of contributions, generating an increasingly rich and sophisticated system in which everyone may eventually find what s/he needs, and where poor material is eventually replaced by better material." - [The Offer Network Protocol: mathematical foundations and a roadmap for the development of a global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Roadmap-OfferNetwork.pdf)

> "Self-organization is usually a slow and difficult process that needs to overcome a variety of obstacles, given that it needs to produce global coordination out of local interactions between agents that have only a very limited perspective on the whole. This is where Internet technologies can play a crucial role. They make it in principle possible for any agent (human or artificial) to interact in real-time with any other agent, while keeping a detailed trace of such interactions and their outcomes. This makes it easier to find, select and reinforce the interactions that are most effective in tackling problems, while eliminating the less useful ones. As a result, coordination and distributed intelligence can evolve much more widely, quickly and effectively. Internet technology not only facilitates globally distributed intelligence, it makes it virtually inevitable." - [Distributed Intelligence Technologies: present and future applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/GB-applications-survey-WS.pdf)

> "Links between systems and components are more likely to be added and reinforced than to be removed. Eventually, all systems will become interconnected, and their pattern of interconnection will become increasingly efficient, maximizing synergies while minimizing conflicts or frictions, so that information can take the most direct route from those that produce it to those that need it. That is why there is a continuing trend for all information technologies to merge into one giant distributed intelligence." - [Distributed Intelligence Technologies: present and future applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/GB-applications-survey-WS.pdf)

> "One of the reasons for the popularity of Internet communities and social media is precisely that they make it easy for people to get recognition for their contributions from peers, thus allowing them to build up a good reputation. The popularity of games, on the other hand, is due for an important part to the fact that they provide immediate feedback about the actions performed by the player, in the form or points, scores, and awards. This creates a sense of achievement, as players can graduate into increasingly advanced “levels” of expertise in the game. While these gaming applications may seem rather frivolous, the underlying psychological mechanism of flow makes a real contribution to people’s level of happiness. Moreover, this mechanism can be extended by techniques such as “gamification” to tasks that are very serious indeed, such as studying mathematics, or increasing fitness. The concept of mobilization system refers to a new type of DIT that encourages and helps people to work towards a worthwhile objective, thus boosting their sense of achievement." - [Distributed Intelligence Technologies: present and future applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/GB-applications-survey-WS.pdf)

> "A worldview gives meaning to our life, and helps us to understand the world around us. A coherent worldview is particularly important in the current era of accelerating scientific, cultural and social developments, in which all the old certainties are put into question. The confusion and fragmentation associated with this contribute to alienation, pessimism and uncertainty, and the need for psychological guidance in the form of a clear and reliable system of thought. Unfortunately such a framework is all too often found in fundamentalist ideologies, or in irrational beliefs and superstitions. Science should be our weapon in the fight against irrationality and fundamentalism. Regrettably, contemporary science seems to contribute to the confusion by the avalanche of often-contradictory observations and theories that it overloads us with. That is why we need to develop a coherent, new worldview that is solidly rooted in the most advanced scientific concepts and observations, but that goes beyond the simple-minded determinism and reductionism of Newtonian science in order to bring us back a sense of meaning, of purpose, of being part of a larger whole." - [Self-organization of complex, intelligent systems: an action ontology for transdisciplinary integration, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/ECCO-paradigm.pdf)

> "We can promote coordination between agents by providing them with an adequate medium. A good example of such a medium is a wiki-style website, which can be edited and added to by a variety of independent individuals. Creating such stigmergic interaction medium is an example of what we call design for self-organization: conceiving and realizing a structure that does not so much tell the agents what they should do, but that helps them find out for themselves what is the most effective way to act in a coordinated, synergetic manner. In self-organization there is no centralized control, no separable agent that directs the actions of the others. Instead, coordinated activity emerges in a distributed manner, out of the tangle of interactions between largely autonomous agents." - [Self-organization of complex, intelligent systems: an action ontology for transdisciplinary integration, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/ECCO-paradigm.pdf)

> "The support structure we are aiming for may be called a mobilization system. Its aim is to encourage and organize people to work towards a common goal. This is particularly useful in our present society that suffers from complexity, fragmentation and information overload, with the result that people have lost a clear sense of goals and values, and often fail to see the forest for the trees. There are presently so many issues that clamor for our attention that we often do not know anymore what to focus on, but instead jump from the one thing to the next without giving anything the attention it deserves, or simply procrastinate and wait for things to be imposed from the outside. A mobilization system would combat this confused and unproductive way of acting by redirecting effort in the most efficient way at the most important issues. This requires the following steps:
>
> a) Helping people to reach consensus about the specific goals that they consider most important. This can be done in part by seeking inspiration about fundamental values in the evolutionary worldview, in part by creating effective discussion systems that help a group to come to a well-reasoned consensus...
>
> b) Motivating and stimulating people to work towards the goals that have thus been agreed upon. Here, a very useful paradigm is the concept of “flow”, which specifies the conditions under which people work in the most focused and motivated manner. These conditions are:
>
>   a1) Clear goals: there should be minimal ambiguity about what to do next;
>
>   a2) Immediate feedback: any action should be followed by an easily interpretable result, so that you either get a confirmation that you are on the right track, or a warning that you need to correct your course;
>
>   a3) Challenges in balance with skills: tasks should be neither too difficult nor too easy for the people entrusted to perform them, in order to avoid either stress or boredom.
>
> Additionally, there exists a wide range of techniques from psychology, behavioral economics and memetics that help us to formulate goals and tasks in a way that is maximally motivating, persuasive and easy to follow.
>
> c) Coordinating and aggregating the individual contributions so as to ensure maximum collective results. This can be built on the mechanisms of stigmergy and self-organization mentioned before." - [Self-organization of complex, intelligent systems: an action ontology for transdisciplinary integration, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/ECCO-paradigm.pdf)

> "The “stigmergic university” system we envisage would contain at least the following components:
>
> - A website that represents knowledge in the form of a conceptual network. Each concept would be explained by a document containing a definition, further explanation, examples, and links with connected concepts. This was the original conception behind the Principia Cybernetica Project. Similar to Wikipedia, users of the systems would be able to edit the text and to create new concept pages. Unlike Wikipedia, concepts would be linked as much as possible using formally labeled connections, so that the knowledge would have the shape of a semantic and associative network rather than an unstructured encyclopedia.
>
> - A set of programs to analyze the structure of this formal network. This module would be able to pinpoint ambiguous, missing, inconsistent, or redundant information, and to suggest ways to improve the network, e.g. by proposing additional links, changing the types of links, or new, higher-order categories that cluster a number of related concepts together. This is the basic “research support” module, which helps individual researchers to discover and resolve the remaining gaps in their understanding.
>
> - A discussion module that would support reaching consensus about as yet unresolved issues, not only via traditional free-form “forums”, but via structured networks of arguments and counterarguments. Here, the systems’ analysis of the network would help the users to identify the weakest arguments, thus stimulating their authors to either change their position, or propose better arguments to defend it. This module further supports research, but now at the level of the dialogue between researchers who have different perspectives on the issue.
>
> - An educational subnetwork of “guided tours” or paths within the conceptual network, functioning as suggested sequences for learners to study the knowledge that start from easier concepts and build up towards more advanced ones depending on the interests of the learner. This would help a student to quickly advance into a complex knowledge domain without getting confused by the variety and complexity of the knowledge that is available. To make this most effective, the guidance should be adapted individually to the interests and skills of each student. This can be achieved with the following assessment module. Moreover, the system would learn from the way it is being used, so that later students would get recommendations that take into account the experiences of previous students.
>
> - A system that generates questions about the knowledge in the network. Most of these questions should be easy to answer by someone who knows the domain, and thus could be used to test the knowledge of the users. This is the module for teaching and assessment on the basis of “inverted learning”. The procedure starts by asking the users a question in order to stimulate or challenge them to reflect about the domain. It then gives them the right answer on the basis of what is contained in the knowledge base (feedback). Depending on how well a user scores on different parts of the curriculum, the system would recommend a further study of particular parts of the knowledge network, thus acting as a kind of tutor to a student. When a question does not have a satisfactory answer within the knowledge base or the user disagrees with the answer that is offered, the user will be stimulated to mark out and—ideally— resolve this knowledge gap. This connects the teaching and assessment module to the research module: depending on how easy or ambiguous the question is, answering it can be more a questions of assessment of existing knowledge or of stimulating the creation of new knowledge.
>
> Like Wikipedia, such a knowledge network should be able to grow indefinitely, so as to encompass all the relevant knowledge about a particular domain. Moreover, the system would automate the social and organizational functions of a university by stimulating users to develop their knowledge, assessing their progress, giving them feedback about how well they are doing, proposing concrete goals for their next study or research, and thus mobilizing and coordinating their cognitive efforts as efficiently as possible towards an ever increasing understanding of the domain. If such a system were deployed at a global level, like Wikipedia, it would provide an invaluable aid to the cognitive development of the world population." - [Self-organization of complex, intelligent systems: an action ontology for transdisciplinary integration, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/ECCO-paradigm.pdf)

> "Regulation (or control): the process by which an agent continually neutralizes deviations from its goals, by effectively counteracting disturbances. Regulation implements negative feedback: deviations in one direction are compensated by reactions that push the state in the opposite direction, so as to reduce their effect. The classic example of regulation is the functioning of a thermostat, which switches on the heating as soon as the temperature moves below its set temperature or goal, and switches off the heating as soon as the temperature moves above the goal temperature." - [Self-organization of complex, intelligent systems: an action ontology for transdisciplinary integration, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/ECCO-paradigm.pdf)

> "Navigation: the process by which an agent constantly adjusts its course of action so as to dynamically maximize its advance in utility while taking into account the diversions it encounter. This means that the agent should optimally allocate its effort in simultaneously counteracting disturbances (regulation), finding affordances (exploration), and making use of the affordances it has found (exploitation). Navigating means that the agent needs to set out a well-thought out, but flexible course, using a combination of planning (to deal with known disturbances and affordances) and improvisation (to deal with new diversions)." - [Self-organization of complex, intelligent systems: an action ontology for transdisciplinary integration, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/ECCO-paradigm.pdf)

> "Variety of action: the number of actions that an agent can potentially execute. The larger an agent’s variety of action, the larger the variety of diversions that the agent can deal with, because different types of diversions typically require different types of actions. This is a generalization of Ashby’s well-known “law of requisite variety”. However, while increasing the variety of actions makes the agent potentially more powerful in achieving its goals, it also makes it more difficult for the agent to select the most appropriate action." - [Self-organization of complex, intelligent systems: an action ontology for transdisciplinary integration, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/ECCO-paradigm.pdf)

> "Cognition: the acquisition, processing, storage, and use of information and knowledge to support intelligent decision-making. This includes perception (the processing and interpretation of incoming information), learning (extracting recurrent regularities from perceptions and storing them into memory in the form of knowledge), and inference (using stored knowledge patterns to anticipate situations as yet not perceived)." - [Self-organization of complex, intelligent systems: an action ontology for transdisciplinary integration, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/ECCO-paradigm.pdf)

> "Rationality: the hypothetical desire and ability of an agent to always choose the best action. In reality, rationality is restricted or bounded, as an agent never has enough information, knowledge or intelligence to accurately determine the utility of all possible courses of action. Bounded rationality implies that there is always an element of uncertainty or trial-and-error involved in making decisions; no decision can be a priori proven to be the best one." - [Self-organization of complex, intelligent systems: an action ontology for transdisciplinary integration, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/ECCO-paradigm.pdf)

> "Collective intelligence: the degree to which the agents in a system collectively can make good decisions as to their future course of action; in particular, the degree to which the agents collectively can make better decisions than any of them individually. Collective intelligence typically arises from the pooling of knowledge: since each agent’s knowledge is slightly different from the knowledge of the others, all agents together will have access to a larger pool of more diverse knowledge. Therefore, collective intelligence can be amplified by increasing the diversity of knowledge among the agents." - [Self-organization of complex, intelligent systems: an action ontology for transdisciplinary integration, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/ECCO-paradigm.pdf)

> "Distributed cognition: the acquisition, storage and use of information and knowledge distributed over different agents in a system, so as to support their collective intelligence. This requires mechanisms to communicate information across the different agents in a coordinated manner, so that the right information is gathered at the right place at the right time. Examples of such supporting mechanisms for the exchange of information are pheromones (smell signals), language, books, signs, computers and the Internet." - [Self-organization of complex, intelligent systems: an action ontology for transdisciplinary integration, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/ECCO-paradigm.pdf)

> "Coordination: the arrangement or mutual alignment of actions so as to maximize synergy and minimize friction in their overall pattern of activity. It implies that any two actions performed simultaneously or subsequently are selected so as to maximally complement and minimally obstruct each other. This requires a minimization of the uncertainty that otherwise would dissipate resources in needless trial-and-error, and therefore the imposition of appropriate constraints or bonds that drive the action in the right direction. There are two types of basic relational constraints between actions: parallel, specifying which actions could or should go on simultaneously, and sequential, specifying which action could or should follow which other action." - [Self-organization of complex, intelligent systems: an action ontology for transdisciplinary integration, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/ECCO-paradigm.pdf)

> "Self-organization: the spontaneous emergence or evolution of coordination in a complex adaptive system. Self-organization reduces variety or uncertainty, and thus imposes constraint. The driving force behind self-organization is the co-evolution or mutual adaptation between the different agents in the system: actions and reactions produce a continuously changing configuration of interactions (variation); however, the more synergetic a configuration, the more "satisfied" the agents will be with the situation, and thus the less they will act to produce further changes (selective retention or preference for synergetic configurations); vice versa, the more friction there is, the more the agents will be pressured to intervene and change course in order to increase their utility (elimination of high friction configurations). Thus, self-organization is merely an application of the evolutionary dynamic of variation (because of actions triggering further actions) and natural selection (because of the implicit preference of agents for the more synergetic patterns of action)." - [Self-organization of complex, intelligent systems: an action ontology for transdisciplinary integration, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/ECCO-paradigm.pdf)

> "Organization: a stabilized network of interactions between agents that functions to ensure the coordination of their actions. This structure specifies the specific roles of and interactions between the system's agents. Its function is to maximize synergy and minimize friction (including transaction costs) in their further interactions. For example, in a human organization the different individuals each have their own responsibilities, and the rules of the organization specify who interacts with whom in what way. This minimizes transaction costs, since it is no longer necessary to search for partners, negotiate with them, or strictly monitor whether they do what they are expected to do. An organization can be imposed from the outside (like in a system engineered by a designer or controlled by a manager), or emerge from self-organization." - [Self-organization of complex, intelligent systems: an action ontology for transdisciplinary integration, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/ECCO-paradigm.pdf)

> "Stigmergy: a form of indirect coordination via the medium, where the trace left by an action in the medium stimulates the performance of a subsequent action, thus building further on the work that has already been done. Examples of stigmergic interaction are termites collectively building a termite hill by adding mud to heaps left by other termites, ants mapping out their territory by leaving trails of pheromone that lead other ants to food sources, and people adding their insights to the writings of others, thus collaboratively developing an encyclopedia (Wikipedia) on the web. Stigmergy is typically the result of the self-organization of a mediator out of the medium. It is probably the simplest way to achieve coordination in a complex system because it does not make any cognitive demands on the agents (such as remembering who is to do what when), and therefore functions even with agents of very low intelligence, such as insects. It also does not require any relationship, communication or even direct interaction between the agents: contributors to a Wikipedia page typically have no idea who the other contributors are, yet their contributions are seamlessly integrated into the emerging whole." - [Self-organization of complex, intelligent systems: an action ontology for transdisciplinary integration, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/ECCO-paradigm.pdf)

> "Evolution of cooperation: the general tendency for interactions to become more synergetic through variation and selection, thus reducing competition and conflict. The biggest obstacle to the evolution of cooperation is the problem of “free riders”: agents that profit from the collaborative effort of other agents but without contributing themselves. Since free riders typically extract more benefit from the cooperation than the cooperators themselves, they risk outcompeting the cooperators, thus destroying any tendency to cooperation. This problem can be overcome via the evolution of a mediator that makes free riding impossible, or at least less attractive than true cooperation." - [Self-organization of complex, intelligent systems: an action ontology for transdisciplinary integration, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/ECCO-paradigm.pdf)

> "According to some estimates, in our present economic system more than half of economic value generated is lost to transaction costs. A fundamental source of transaction costs is uncertainty: since the agent does not know what transaction to enter into, what to agree upon, or what to expect, it will need to spend a lot of energy in search, negotiation, and enforcement of agreements." - [Self-organization of complex, intelligent systems: an action ontology for transdisciplinary integration, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/ECCO-paradigm.pdf)




> "" - [Stigmergy as a Universal Coordination Mechanism: components, varieties and applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-Springer.pdf)

> "" - [Stigmergy as a Universal Coordination Mechanism: components, varieties and applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-Springer.pdf)

> "" - [Stigmergy as a Universal Coordination Mechanism: components, varieties and applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-Springer.pdf)

> "" - [Stigmergy as a Universal Coordination Mechanism: components, varieties and applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-Springer.pdf)

> "" - [Stigmergy as a Universal Coordination Mechanism: components, varieties and applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-Springer.pdf)

> "" - [Stigmergy as a Universal Coordination Mechanism: components, varieties and applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-Springer.pdf)

> "" - []()

> "" - []()

> "" - []()

> "" - []()

> "" - []()






Getting into a flow state during the activity is the gold standard for intrinsic
motivation. Csíkszentmihályi’s conditions of flow include clear goals, immediate
feedback, and a match between challenge and capacity.

I recently did a 2-week solo meditation retreat focused on the practice of Shi-ne.
13-day solo retreat (no human contact, electronic devices, books, etc.)
8 hours of meditation per day as a target (I only did 6 hours on 3 days and 4
hours on the last day), split up into 1-hour sessions (occasionally 30 minutes).
20 minutes of stretching and 1-2 hours of walking per day
Vegetarian food, 1 coffee per day, nicotine chewing gum on walks
https://deconstructingyourself.com/



LessWrong. (2013). Complexity of value. LessWrong. Wiki. Retrieved from
http://wiki.lesswrong.com/wiki/Complexity_of_value

Helbing, Dirk (2013). Economics 2.0: The Natural Step towards A Self-Regulating, Participatory Market Society. http://arxiv.org/abs/1305.4078

Delphi procedure ??? what is that - google it

Rodriguez, M.A (2007) Social Decision Making with Multi-Relational Networks and Grammar-Based
Particle Swarms, in: 2007 Hawaii International Conference on Systems Science (HICSS) IEEE
Computer Society

Heylighen F. (1999a) “The Growth of Structural and Functional Complexity during Evolution“, in: F.
Heylighen, J. Bollen & A. Riegler (eds.) The Evolution of Complexity Kluwer Academic,
Dordrecht, p. 17-44

https://twitter.com/jim_rutt/status/1613145091874357249?lang=en

https://medium.com/age-of-awareness/a-metamodern-guide-to-human-development-49fe8d8f0e8f

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r9gYpj0WLcg

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hKvVdGNzCQk&t=20s

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZzpOUf8OTAA&t=24s

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xB1pb3dlrWE

https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLa_4sU5_wQrlw5b9oc1tDaziHyEqXUnl7https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLa_4sU5_wQrlw5b9oc1tDaziHyEqXUnl7

Gebser calls “aperspectival”
https://www.weirdstudies.com/56

https://slatestarcodex.com/2014/06/07/archipelago-and-atomic-communitarianism/

"The task is to see reality as it is, the method is to look through millions of eyes" - Nietzsche

https://metamoderna.org/hanzis-private-notes-the-5-metamemes-before-metamodernism/

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demarcation_problem#:~:text=In%20philosophy%20of%20science%20and,art%20and%20literature%20and%20beliefs.

Chesterton’s fence

https://lessfoolish.substack.com/

https://systems-souls-society.com/tasting-the-pickle-ten-flavours-of-meta-crisis-and-the-appetite-for-a-new-civilisation/

https://octopusyarn.substack.com/p/why-we-need-a-new-religion

https://www.quora.com/Why-do-religions-exist-and-what-is-their-purpose-to-society

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cult_of_the_Supreme_Being

https://www.jstor.org/stable/3087765#metadata_info_tab_contents

https://www.ribbonfarm.com/2020/01/23/being-your-selves-identity-rd-on-alt-twitter/

Francis Heylighen, Stigmergy as a Generic Mechanism for Coordination: Definition, Varieties and Aspects, Ecco, 2011
http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-WorkingPaper.pdf

Heylighen, F. 2013. From human computation to the Global Brain: the self-organization of distributed intelligence. In: Michelucci, P. (Ed.), Handbook of Human Computation.

Rifkin, J. 2014. The zero marginal cost society: The internet of things, the collaborative commons, and the eclipse of capitalism. Palgrave Macmillan Trade.

Chorost, M. 2011. World wide mind: The coming integration of humanity. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Cole-Turner, R. 2012. The singularity and the rapture: Transhumanist and popular Christian views of the future. Zygon, 47: 777-796.

Hayles, N.K. 2012. How we think: Digital media and contemporary technogenesis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Turchin, V. 1977. The Phenomenon of Science: A Cybernetic Approach to Human Evolution. New York: Columbia University Press.

Stewart, J. 2008. The future of life and what it means for humanity. In: C. Vidal (Ed.), The evolution and development of the universe, pp. 349-352.

Stewart, J. 2014. The direction of evolution: The rise of cooperative organization. Biosystems, DOI: 10.1016/j.biosystems.2014.05.006.

Heylighen, F. 2014. Complexity and Evolution: fundamental concepts of a new scientific worldview. Lecture notes 2014-15.
http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/books/Complexity-Evolution.pdf

Heylighen, F. 2014. Complexity and Evolution: fundamental concepts of a new scientific worldview. Lecture notes 2014-15.
http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/books/Complexity-Evolution.pdf

Klein, M. 2007. Achieving Collective Intelligence via Large-­‐Scale On-­‐Line Argumentation.

Klein, M. 2012. Enabling Large-­‐Scale Deliberation Using Attention-­‐Mediation Metrics.	

Francis Heylighen, Cognitive Systems.

Heylighen and Chielens, p. 10370; Francis Heylighen, ‘What Makes a Meme Successful? Selection Criteria for Cultural Evolution’, in Proc. 16th Int. Congress on Cybernetics (Namur: Association Internat. de Cybernétique, 1998), p. 423–418.

C. Heath and D. Heath, Made to Stick: Why Some Ideas Survive and Others Die (Random House, 2007).

Francis Heylighen, ‘Why Is Open Access Development so Successful? Stigmergic Organization and the Economics of Information’, in Open Source Jahrbuch 2007, ed. by B. Lutterbeck, M. Baerwolff & R. A. Gehring (Lehmanns Media, 2007), pp. 165–180
http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/OpenSourceStigmergy.pdf

C. Gershenson, ‘Towards Self-organizing Bureaucracies’, International Journal of Public Information Systems, 1 (2008), 1–24.

Michael, D. R., & Chen, S. L. (2005). Serious games: Games that educate, train, and inform. Muska & Lipman/Premier-Trade.

> "Man is least himself when he talks in his own person. Give him a mask, and he will tell you the truth." - [Oscar Wilde]()

Heylighen, F., Busseniers, E., Veitas, V., Vidal, C., & Weinbaum, D. R. (2012). Foundations for a Mathematical Model of the Global Brain: architecture, components, and specifications (GBI Working Papers No. 2012-05). GBI Working Papers. Retrieved
from http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/papers/TowardsGB-model.pdf

Heylighen, F., Kostov, I., & Kiemen, M. (2013). Mobilization Systems: technologies for motivating and coordinating human action. In Peters M. A., Besley T. and Araya D. (Ed.), The New Development Paradigm: Education, Knowledge Economy and Digital
http://pcp.vub.ac.be/Papers/MobilizationSystems.pdf

Jøsang, A., Ismail, R., & Boyd, C. (2007). A survey of trust and reputation systems for online service provision. Decision Support Systems, Emerging Issues in Collaborative Commerce, 43(2), 618–644. doi:10.1016/j.dss.2005.05.019

Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2008). Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and happiness. Yale Univ Pr.

Computer scientist Viktoras Veitas and philosopher David Weinbaum recently proposed a futuristic evolutionary paradigm, the ‘World of Views’, which may be useful to help us situate an exploration of the technocultural world. The ‘World of Views’ attempts to understand a post- scarcity, post-singularity, evolutionary landscape where the primary driver of change is the “multiplicity of unique, modular, and open co-evolving worldviews” (Veitas & Weinbaum 2015, p. 504)

Veitas, V. & Weinbau, D. 2015. A world of views: A world of interacting post-human intelligences. In: B. Goertzel & T. Goertzel (Eds.), The beginning of the end: Life, society, and economy on the brink of singularity, pp. 495-567.


Coenen T. (2006) Knowledge sharing over social networking systems ECCO working paper 2006-11,
http://homepages.vub.ac.be/~tcoenen/thesis.pdf

Why is Open Source Development so Successful? Stigmergic organization and the economics of information in: B. Lutterbeck, M. Baerwolff & R. A. Gehring (eds.) Open Source Jahrbuch 2007, Lehmanns Media.

Heylighen F., Heath M., F. Van Overwalle (2004) The Emergence of Distributed Cognition: a conceptual framework, Proceedings of Collective Intentionality IV, Siena (Italy)

Martens B. (2004) The Cognitive Mechanics of Economic Development and Institutional Change, Routledge

Rodriguez, M.A (2007) Social Decision Making with Multi-Relational Networks and Grammar-Based Particle Swarms, in: 2007 Hawaii International Conference on Systems Science (HICSS) IEEE Computer Society

Kostakis, Vasileios, Wolfgang Drechsler, Diego Gonzalez & Ishan Shapiro. no date. “The
emergence of open value network: Measuring value and distributing revenue in peer
production projects” Downloaded on October 23, 2015 from
http://www.p2plab.gr/en/archives/977

Bonabeau, E. (2009). Decisions 2.0: The power of collective intelligence. MIT Sloan
http://www.worldwideopen.org/uploads/groups_bull/files/30/decision%202.0.pdf

De Alfaro, L., Kulshreshtha, A., Pye, I., & Adler, B. T. (2011). Reputation systems for open collaboration. Communications of the ACM, 54(8), 81–87. Retrieved from
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1978560

Elmenreich, W., D’Souza, R., Bettstetter, C., & de Meer, H. (2009). A Survey of Models and Design Methods for Self-Organizing Networked Systems. Self-Organizing Systems, 37–49.

Gao, H., Barbier, G., & Goolsby, R. (2011). Harnessing the crowdsourcing power of social media for disaster relief. Intelligent Systems, IEEE, 26(3), 10–14.

Evrard, A. E., Erdmann, C., Holmquist, J., Damon, J., & Dietrich, D. (2015). Persistent, Global Identity for Scientists via ORCID. arXiv:1502.06274 [astro-ph,physics:physics]. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.06274

ActInf GuestStream #015.1_ Bobby Azarian, Universal Bayesianism_ A New Kind of Theory of Everything-_JCaic5Cxms
ActInf GuestStream #015.2 ~ Bobby Azarian _The Integrated Evolutionary Synthesis_-WEfc9X437yY
ActInf GuestStream #015.3 ~ Bobby Azarian_ _The Teleological Stance_ The Free Energy Principle..._-S-tFHIqtbSI

> "Inference is actually quite close to a theory of everything - including evolution, consciousness, and life itself." - [Karl Friston](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_JCaic5Cxms)

> "Bayesian inference is an algorithm for the accumulation of evidence-based knowledge. This algorithm is now seen to operate over a wide range of evolutionary processes, including natural selection, the evolution of mental models and cultural evolutionary processes, notably including science itself." - [John Campbell](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_JCaic5Cxms)

^^ time: 4900

> "The whole [scientific] process resembles biological evolution. A problem is like an ecological niche, and a theory is like a gene or a species which is being tested for viability in that niche." - [David Deutsch, The Fabric of Reality](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_JCaic5Cxms)

TODO: the good regulator theorem (aka the Internal Model Principle) by Ross Ashby - any system that regulates/controls another system must have a model of that system ==> organisms model their environment
The law of requisite variety - tells us something about the computational sophistication of the internal model - the complexity of the model must be as complex as the challenges of the niche

evolution is an inference engine 
the organisms that persist are the models that are best able to predict the environment

TODO: landauer/landawer limit? written about at SFI by David someone - about energy efficiency

SCREENSHOTS !!!

