



> "Stigmergy is an indirect, mediated mechanism of coordination between actions, in which the trace of an action left on a medium stimulates the performance of a subsequent action." - [Stigmergy as a Universal Coordination Mechanism: components, varieties and applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-Springer.pdf)












> "The potential for theoretical explanation and practical application of the stigmergy concept is much larger still than hitherto assumed. What (Parunak, 2006) noted about human institutions, that the more difficult issue is to find examples where stigmergy does not apply, extends to complex systems in general, and in particular to systems that exhibit some form of cognition, cooperation, or organization that is the result of evolution. When properly defined, the mechanism of stigmergy appears to be nearly ubiquitous, and able to illuminate a variety of conceptual problems in a non-trivial manner." - [Stigmergy as a Universal Coordination Mechanism: components, varieties and applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-Springer.pdf)

> "Another, even more common misunderstanding is that stigmergy only concerns groups or swarms consisting of many agents. As we will show, stigmergy is just as important for understanding the behavior of a single individual." - [Stigmergy as a Universal Coordination Mechanism: components, varieties and applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-Springer.pdf)





> "Compared to traditional methods of organization, stigmergy makes absolutely minimal demands on the agents. In particular, in stigmergic collaboration there is no need for:
>
> • planning or anticipation: agents only need to know the present state of the activity; the overall goal, next step or end result is irrelevant for their present work. In Wikipedia, there is no plan specifying which information should be added to the encyclopedia when.
>
> • memory: agents do not need to remember their previous activity; no information about the state of the work needs to be stored anywhere except in the medium.
>
> • communication: no information needs to be transferred between the agents, except via the work done in the medium; there is in particular no need for the agents to negotiate about who does what.
>
> • mutual awareness: each agent works independently; it does not even need to know that others participate. For example, contributors to Wikipedia generally do not know each other or communicate with each other.
>
> • simultaneous presence: there is in general no need for the agents to be present at the same time or at the same place; tasks are registered in the medium so that they can be picked up by agents whenever and wherever they are available. That is how worldwide communities can collaborate on a single software project.
>
> • imposed sequence: actions are performed automatically in the right order, since an action will not be started until the right condition is in place; the workflow emerges spontaneously, as the completion of one task triggers the initiation of the next task(s)
>
> • imposed division of labor: each agent will only perform the actions for which it has the required competence, i.e. for which it possesses adequate condition-action rules; normally, the more “confident” the agent is about the right action (i.e. the stronger the connection between condition and action), the more it will be stimulated by the condition, and the quicker it will be to start the job; in this way, tasks are automatically assigned to the most competent agents
>
> • commitment: agents do no need to commit to a particular task (in contradiction to what (Jennings, 1993) claims about multi-agent coordination); an agent decides on the spot what work it should do, depending on opportunity and other contingent conditions; an agent that quits or otherwise becomes unavailable is automatically replaced by another one
>
> • centralized control or supervision: errors or perturbations are automatically corrected, as they merely create a new condition stimulating new actions to deal with the challenge; the activity is self-organizing: global organization emerges from local interactions, without any centralized control directing the activity. For example, bugs in open-source software are spotted by users, and resolved by other contributors." - [Stigmergy as a Universal Coordination Mechanism: components, varieties and applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-Springer.pdf)

> "Stigmergy exhibits another fundamental “signature” of self-organization: positive feedback. Error-controlled regulation assumes negative feedback: the reduction of deviations away from the goal. However, goal-directed action can also make use of positive feedback: the amplification of movements towards the goal." - [Stigmergy as a Universal Coordination Mechanism: components, varieties and applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-Springer.pdf)

> "The number of agents collaborating on a stigmergic project is actually much less fundamental than it may seem. The essence of the activity is always the same. Assuming that the agents have the same competencies, adding more agents merely increases manpower and therefore the size of the problem that can be tackled, the speed of advance, or the eventual magnitude of the achievement. Only when the agents are diverse can an increase in their number produce a qualitative improvement in the solution.
>
> The only complication added is that agents may get in each other's way, in the sense that similar individuals perceiving the same stimulus are likely to move to the same place at the same time, thus obstructing each other's actions. This problem is easily tackled by an additional rule, which is already implicit in individual work but likely to become reinforced during collaborative work: keep a minimum distance from obstacles— including other agents. This rule is a well-known ingredient in the many successful simulations of collectively moving animals, such as flocks, schools or swarms, allowing densely packed groups of agents to follow complex, synchronized trajectories without ever bumping into each other." - [Stigmergy as a Universal Coordination Mechanism: components, varieties and applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-Springer.pdf)

> "Quantitative vs. qualitative stigmergy:
>
> Quantitative stigmergy refers to perceived conditions that differ in strength or degree, and where stronger traces typically elicit more forceful (intense, frequent, …) actions. This quantitative variation is perhaps best captured using my definition of stimulation in terms of conditional probability: the stronger the trace, the larger the probability of a certain action given that trace. Over an extended period, higher probability implies more frequent actions by more numerous agents, and therefore more intense overall activity. The two paradigmatic cases of stigmergy, termite nest-building and ant trail-laying, follow this quantitative logic. The higher the emerging heap of mud (stronger trace), the more an individual termite is attracted to it, and therefore the larger the probability or frequency of mud being added. The stronger the scent of pheromone on a trail, the less likely an ant is to deviate from that trail, and therefore the higher the probability that it too will reinforce the trail with additional pheromone. These are typical examples of the positive feedback that efficiently amplifies positive developments.
>
> But quantitative stigmergy can also be exemplified by negative feedback, where a stronger trace leads to less activity. A human example can be found in the market mechanism. Extensive buying of a good (action) reduces the supply and thus increases the price, which is a quantitative trace left by the collective buying and selling activity. A higher price will normally reduce the probability that someone would buy additional stock of that good (negative stimulation). Thus, a higher price reduces demand, which in turn will reduce the price. This mechanism of self-organizing, distributed control implements the “invisible hand” of the market. It stabilizes prices and efficiently allocates production capacity to the goods that are most in demand.
>
> Qualitative stigmergy refers to conditions and actions that differ in kind rather than in degree. In this case, a different trace stimulates a different type of action. An example can be found in the different stages of the building of a funnel-shaped nest by the solitary wasp that we discussed, where each stage requires a particular type of building action. A human example can be found in “wiki” websites that are edited by their own readers. A paragraph that contains a semantic mistake (e.g. in the definition of a word) will elicit a corrective action (e.g. writing a new definition). Different types of errors, vagueness, or lack of information will stimulate different types of additions and corrections." - [Stigmergy as a Universal Coordination Mechanism: components, varieties and applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-Springer.pdf)

> "This type of indirect stimulation, not by the work itself but by a specially evolved “side-effect”, has been called marker-based stigmergy. The evolution of markers is an obvious method to make stigmergy more efficient, by more reliably focusing the agents' attention on the most relevant aspects of the work that needs to be done. However, it entails an extra cost and complication in that individuals need to perform the task of manufacturing markers in addition to the work itself. A human example can be found in the Wikipedia encyclopedia on the web. Readers are stimulated to improve existing pages either directly, by reading the text and noticing its shortcomings, or indirectly, by reading comments that summarize the tasks that still need to be done—such as adding references, clarifying ambiguous sections, or checking facts. The direct method exemplifies sematectonic stigmergy, the indirect one marker-based stigmergy. The “markers” in this case are the various “to do” notes that attract the attention to the problems that still require work. A marker can be seen as an abstract, conventional sign, intentionally representing the work to be done instead of mechanically registering its effects. In Peirce's semiotic taxonomy of signs, a marker is a symbol, while a sematectonic trace is an index. As such, a marker may seem to belong to a higher-order semiotic or communicative category of phenomena—a “meta-level” compared to the “object level” of the work itself. However, as in all phenomena produced by evolution, there is an essential continuity between the more primitive and the more “advanced” versions." - [Stigmergy as a Universal Coordination Mechanism: components, varieties and applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-Springer.pdf)

> "This is the same phenomenon of selective “forgetting” that characterizes memory in the brain: neural connections that are no longer reinforced will gradually lose their strength relative to recently reinforced ones. The speed of this forgetting depends on the learning parameter, as defined in neural networks. A large value of the parameter means that new changes in connection strength are large relative to the cumulative effect of previous ones, thus promoting the speedy establishment of new memory traces—but also the quick obsolescence of older traces. A small value, on the other hand, means that older learning episodes continue to exert a strong effect. A similar parameter probably controls the external memory of ants as laid down in pheromone trails: newly added pheromone should be strong enough to allow trails towards newly found food sources to eventually become more attractive than previously found ones; yet, it should not be so strong that some recent journeys by ants carrying food from a new, unproven source can overpower the signals pointing to an older source whose reliability is evidenced by hundreds of successful journeys. Given that what counts is the relative attractiveness of different options for action, the “learning” parameter, which determines the intensity of new contributions to the trace, is in practice equivalent to a “forgetting” parameter, which determines the rate of decay of the existing trace. The optimal value of this parameter will depend on the speed with which information becomes obsolete." - [Stigmergy as a Universal Coordination Mechanism: components, varieties and applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-Springer.pdf)

> "No sharp distinction can be made between persistent and transient traces used in stigmergy: these are merely the opposite ends of a continuum. Yet, the distinction may be useful for conceptual clarification. Persistent traces lead to what may be called asynchronous stigmergy: the different agents or productions do not need to be present at the same time, since the trace remains to guide them at any later time. Asynchronous communication can be illustrated by media such as print, email, or websites. Its advantage is that information remains available, so that it can be processed at the most appropriate occasion, and can accumulate and mature over the longer term. Transient traces lead to synchronous stigmergy: the agents need to be simultaneously present for the coordination to succeed.
>
> Synchronous communication may be exemplified by media such as telephone and Internet “chat”. Its advantage is that interaction, and therefore feedback, is instantaneous, so that disturbances and coordination errors can be corrected without delay. Synchronous communication is rarely conceived as stigmergic, since it is typically used for direct interaction, such as conversation or discussion. Yet, a warning cry or a chemical signal exemplify indirect interaction: they are targeted at no one in particular but merely “released” in the medium. Examples of stigmergy in synchronous interaction are even clearer when the signal is sematectonic. For example, a bird spotting a danger (condition) will start to fly (action), and by this example (transient trace) set off the whole flock to fly away (subsequent action). Synchronous stigmergy may be best exemplified by the collective movement in herds, flocks or swarms, where the agents are continually adjusting their trajectory on the basis of real-time perceptions of the movements of other agents." - [Stigmergy as a Universal Coordination Mechanism: components, varieties and applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-Springer.pdf)

> "A one-dimensional, quantitative aspect: the range or scope of the stigmergic process. The scope represents the size of the “neighborhood” across which a stigmergic signal is perceivable. The two poles of the scope continuum may be called broadcast and narrowcast. Broadcasted traces can be perceived by all agents involved. Narrowcasted traces are perceivable by only one or a few agents." - [Stigmergy as a Universal Coordination Mechanism: components, varieties and applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-Springer.pdf)

> "The situation becomes more complex—but also more interesting—when different actions or agents have a different scope, so that A's traces e.g. may reach B, C and D, while D's traces reach B and E. In this case, the topology of the stigmergic medium becomes equivalent to a network where different nodes (A, B, C…) each are connected to (i.e. can deposit traces perceivable by) different other nodes. The implication is that the network paradigm—which is increasingly popular for modeling various complex and self-organizing systems such as neural networks, social networks, citation networks, etc.—could be viewed as a special case of the stigmergic paradigm, albeit a rather complicated one." - [Stigmergy as a Universal Coordination Mechanism: components, varieties and applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-Springer.pdf)

> "Next to its general function of coordination, stigmergy in particular supports cognition and cooperation. Traditionally, cognition has been viewed as the processing of information inside the brain. More recent approaches, however, note that both the information and the processing often reside in the outside world—or what we have called the medium. For example, documents function as an external memory for storing knowledge and data, while calculations are typically performed on a piece of paper or on a calculator. Without such supporting media, most advanced reasoning—as performed e.g. in science and technology—would be simply impossible. Thus, the human mind extends into the environment, “outsourcing” some of its functions to external support systems. The reason is that our memory and information processing capabilities have rather strict limitations—most famously the “magical number 7 plus or minus 2” which denotes the maximum number of items we can hold in short-term memory. Books and computers are relatively recent inventions. However, the use of an external medium for supporting cognition is probably as old as cognition itself. More precisely, our mental capabilities can be seen as an interiorization of what were initially stigmergic interactions with the environment." - [Stigmergy as a Universal Coordination Mechanism: components, varieties and applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-Springer.pdf)

> "In the stigmergic paradigm, the common good (e.g. Wikipedia, or a network of trails and roads connecting common destinations) is gradually built up via the cooperation implicit in stigmergically coordinated actions. Free riders may profit from this common good without putting in any effort in return. However, the benefit derived from a stigmergic trace does not in general reduce the value of that trace. For example, an ant that follows a pheromone trace laid by others without adding pheromone of its own does not by that action make the pheromone trace less useful to the other ants. Similarly, a person who downloads a piece of open source software without contributing to the development of that software does not impose any burden on the software developers. Thus, in a situation of stigmergy, a free rider or “defector” does not weaken the cooperators, in contrast to situations like the Prisoners’ dilemma or Tragedy of the Commons.
>
> In a sense, by not contributing the free riding agent merely weakens its own position, because it passes by the opportunity to adapt the trace to its own preferences. As we saw, the stigmergic trace is the aggregate of many independent actions, each of which helps the agent that performed it to achieve its goals. The ant that finds food but does not leave a pheromone trace on its way back to the nest not only does not help others to get to that food: it also does not help itself, because without the trace it is very unlikely to find the same food source again. The trace is both an individual and a collective “mental map” that indicates effective actions. Not leaving a trace makes your own future work harder than it needs to be." - [Stigmergy as a Universal Coordination Mechanism: components, varieties and applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-Springer.pdf)

> "In the short run, the free rider may seem to have the benefit over the cooperator of spending less energy establishing and maintaining the trace. However, the cooperator collects other benefits. First, as we noted with the ant leaving pheromone or the hiker breaking off branches, the cooperating agent helps itself by creating a trace. Second, the stigmergic interaction will boost the benefits of that individual trace by stimulating others to expand on it. For example, an ant creating a trail to a new food source will incite others to explore the neighborhood of that source, potentially discovering even better sources or shorter trails. Similarly, the hiker who partially cleared a path will thus increase the probability of others following that same path while performing further clearing themselves. This is the positive feedback of actions eliciting more actions that makes stigmergy so effective. The free rider simply misses out on this potential amplification of its actions." - [Stigmergy as a Universal Coordination Mechanism: components, varieties and applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-Springer.pdf)

> "Virtually all evolved processes that require coordination between actions rely at some level on stigmergy, in the sense that subsequent actions are stimulated by the trace left by previous actions in some observable and manipulable medium. The trace functions like a registry and map, indicating which actions have been performed and which still need to be performed. It is shared by all agents that have access to the medium, thus allowing them to coordinate their actions without need for agent-to-agent communication. It also allows individual agents to perform complex sequences of actions without need for a memory or plan that keeps track of which action needs to be performed when...
>
> Stigmergy can be seen as a fundamental mechanism of self-organization: it allows global, coordinated activity to emerge out of local, independent actions. Like self- organization in general, stigmergy relies on feedback: action elicits action, via the intermediary of the trace. This feedback is typically positive, in that actions intensify and elaborate the trace, thus eliciting more intense and diverse further actions. The resulting virtuous cycle explains in part why stigmergic organization is so surprisingly effective, enabling the construction of complex structures—such as a termite hill, a network of trails, or a world encyclopedia—in a very short time, even when starting from scratch. When necessary, feedback can also be negative: errors, disturbances or “overshoots” that make the trace deviate from its ideal shape will elicit actions that correct the deviation.
>
> We have examined different variations on this theme by distinguishing basic aspects or dimensions in which the process can vary. The number of agents involved turns out to be less fundamental than is generally assumed. Increasing that number will qualitatively enhance the result only if the agents are sufficiently diverse in the actions they contribute, yet sufficiently aligned in their strategies so that they do not hinder each other. Like the number of agents, the difference between qualitative and quantitative stigmergy does not seem essential, given that the notion of “stimulation” entails a quantitative aspect of intensity or probability, while the actions that are stimulated more or less intensively differ qualitatively. The difference between sematectonic traces—the concrete, observable results of work performed—and markers—traces left to guide subsequent actions, but without contributing to the work itself—is important but subtle. The use of markers allows a more fine-grained control of stigmergic coordination, but demands an advanced level of collective evolution, in which certain traces have acquired a conventional meaning among the agents that use them. The transience of the trace is crucial in order to ensure that the list of “to do’s” remains up to date: in a quickly changing environment, actions need to adapt in time to new circumstances, which means that an outdated trace should decay before it would elicit too much useless activity; in a more stable environment, on the other hand, persistent traces enable the accumulation of a long and detailed memory. A final dimension of variation, the broadcast-narrowcast continuum, is as yet insufficiently investigated. Nevertheless, it hints at an essential continuity between stigmergic mechanisms of self-organization (using a typically broadcasted trace) and the better-known, local interaction mechanisms, where the result of an action only affects linked or neighboring agents." - [Stigmergy as a Universal Coordination Mechanism: components, varieties and applications, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Stigmergy-Springer.pdf)









> "The basis of its success (Wikipedia) is [stigmergy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stigmergy), a mechanism of self-organizing coordination between independent agents. The principle is that the work of one individual (e.g. an edit of a Wikipedia text) leaves a public trace (e.g. a change in the corresponding web page) that can stimulate one or more other individuals to continue the work (e.g. add further details or correct wrong assumptions). Thus, independent contributions build further the one on top of the other, producing a collective result much richer and more complex than could have been achieved via any traditional, centralized form of organization. There are no obvious limits to such a self-amplifying process of contributions eliciting further contributions." - [Return to Eden? Promises and Perils on the Road to a Global Superintelligence, by Francis Heylighen](http://pcp.vub.ac.be/Papers/BrinkofSingularity.pdf)



> "This is the real force behind globalization: the observation that social, economical and cultural processes no longer are impeded by geographical borders or distances, but cover the world as a whole. This is most clear on the Internet, where you can exchange information virtually instantaneously, without being aware whether your correspondent is situated around the corner, or on the other side of the planet." - [Accelerating Socio-Technological Evolution: from ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/AcceleratingEvolution.pdf)

> "The problem of overcoming the conflicts intrinsic to competitive relations is exemplified by the Prisoners’ Dilemma and the Tragedy of the Commons. In different situations, different solutions have typically evolved. However, these solutions are all related, in the sense that they can be viewed as institutions in the broadest sense of the word, i.e. as socially agreed-upon systems of rules and control mechanisms for enforcing them, that regulate and coordinate interactions between agents so as to minimize friction and maximize synergy." - [Accelerating Socio-Technological Evolution: from ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/AcceleratingEvolution.pdf)

> "After a while, the network of trails will have stabilized so that individual animals only need to contribute a minimal effort to its maintenance. Thus, the influence of individual agents on the medium tends to decrease. On the other hand, as the network becomes more reliable and extensive, the influence of the medium on the agents’ activities increases. Eventually, the asymmetry is inverted: where initially we would see the agents as manipulating the medium, now it becomes more parsimonious to see the medium as directing the agents. The medium has turned into a mediator: it coordinates the individual activities so as to minimize friction or conflict, and to maximize synergy. The classic example of such an “active” coordination medium can be found in the pheromone trails that ants create while searching for food. The trail network functions like an external memory or “collective mental map” for the ant colony, directing the individual ants to the different food sources and the nest via the most efficient routes." - [Accelerating Socio-Technological Evolution: from ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/AcceleratingEvolution.pdf)

> "There are limits to the reduction of physical friction: it becomes increasingly difficult to reduce the consumption of matter and energy simply because there is a minimal amount of matter/energy necessary for processes like feeding, movement, and construction. On the other hand, there is no clear limit to the reduction of informational or social friction, in that the losses of frictional interactions (negative - 12 -sum) can be turned into the gains of synergetic interactions (positive sum)." - [Accelerating Socio-Technological Evolution: from ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/AcceleratingEvolution.pdf)

> "The remarkable efficiency of the Internet is at present still mostly physical or informational, not social. The Internet has grown so quickly that it has not had the time to evolve efficient institutions, i.e. collective systems of rules that coordinate individual actions. The result is a messy, confusing and constantly changing information landscape, that in principle offers immense benefits, but in practice only works reliably for a limited number of applications, while producing confusion, information overload, and various forms of “cybercrime”. As a result, an individual discovery published on the net may indeed change the world’s outlook within days, but the more likely outcome is that it will get buried within masses of other, mostly much less relevant information, and not receive the attention it deserves.
>
> In conclusion, the evolutionary dynamics underlying globalization has already led to a relatively efficient physical distribution of matter, energy and information across the globe, but still needs to produce the social institutions that go with it. This is not a very original observation: critics of the globalization of markets have pointed out that the extension of the free trade in goods and services needs to be counterbalanced by the further development of transnational institutions, such as UN, UNESCO, WHO, etc., to protect the rights of children, workers, consumers, cultural groups or the environment. The “stigmergic” theory proposed here, however, suggests a number of complementary mechanisms through which new types of institutions are likely to evolve.
>
> The main idea is that the external interaction medium, a role that is increasingly dominated by the Internet, will evolve into a mediator. This mediator will not only facilitate, but direct, and eventually control, interactions so as to maximize their synergy. To achieve that, the medium needs to develop a form of intelligent management of the communication processes it supports, leading to what may be called collective intelligence or distributed cognition. When this distributed intelligence spans the world, the resulting system may be called the Global Brain." - [Accelerating Socio-Technological Evolution: from ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/AcceleratingEvolution.pdf)

> "Quantitative stigmergy ranks or prioritizes existing possibilities for action, thus helping agents to choose the action that is most likely to be beneficial. Qualitative stigmergy creates potential for action by changing the medium in such a way that novel possibilities arise." - [Accelerating Socio-Technological Evolution: from ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/AcceleratingEvolution.pdf)

> "The basic mechanism whereby useful paths are gradually reinforced, and less useful ones weakened, provides a very general heuristic to tackle a variety of problems. It can be seen as a quantitative, stigmergic instantiation of the mechanism of evolution itself: maintain and grow the fit (useful); reduce, and eventually eliminate, the unfit...
>
> Furthermore, the same mechanism seems to underlie learning in the brain: neuronal connections that are successfully used become stronger; the others become weaker. It is this analogy that initially inspired me to conceive of the World-Wide Web as a potential Global Brain. The web is a distributed network of documents connected by hyperlinks along which people travel (“surf”) from page to page... when people surfing the web end up in a particularly interesting page, they are likely to create one or more new links from their own pages pointing directly to it, thus shortcutting the long sequence they followed before finding it. This increases the number of links to the page, and the probability that other people would encounter it. The overall effect is captured by Google’s PageRank algorithm, which provides a measure of the importance of a website as determined by the links directly or indirectly pointing to it. This is another example of quantitative stigmergy: the actions of many independent agents (people inserting links) on a shared medium (the web) produce a collective ranking (PageRank) that helps other agents find the options (documents) most likely to be useful to them." - [Accelerating Socio-Technological Evolution: from ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/AcceleratingEvolution.pdf)

> "Agent swarms can perform not only the equivalent of intuitive, subconscious processes of activation spreading through the brain, but of systematic, logical search and deduction. To achieve that, the knowledge in the web needs to be organized according to a consensual ontology, i.e. a formal system of categories and relationships. Developing such ontologies is the goal of the Semantic Web project. Given such a semantic network, a software agent could be programmed with a “grammar” of rules that tell it to only explore or return certain categories of nodes and links. A swarm of such agents should for example be able to find all birds that do not fly, or the most representative researchers (as measured e.g. by PageRank or citation impact) who have written about globalization and evolution, cite publications of Modelski, work in one of the NATO countries and have a PhD, so that you can invite them to your NATO-sponsored workshop.
>
> In conclusion, quantitative stigmergy is able to turn the web from a passive medium for communication and storage of information into an intelligent mediator that uses learning and inference mechanisms similar to those of the human brain to recommend to its users the actions, information sources, or people most likely to be helpful for their aims. To achieve this, the intelligent web draws on the experience and knowledge of its users collectively, as externalized in the “trace” of preferences they leave on the paths they have traveled." - [Accelerating Socio-Technological Evolution: from ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/AcceleratingEvolution.pdf)

> "A major effect of stigmergy is the acceleration of evolution: a solution to an evolutionary problem found by one agent can now, by impressing it upon the medium, be used and improved by other agents. Since the medium benefits all agents’ fitness, there will be a selective pressure on the agents to find solutions that make the medium itself more powerful. The further the medium extends, and the easier it becomes for agents to interact with it, the quicker innovations will spread and undergo further improvements. This leads to a self-reinforcing process: improvement of the medium facilitates further innovation, which in turn helps improve the medium." - [Accelerating Socio-Technological Evolution: from ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/AcceleratingEvolution.pdf)

> "Connectivity implies an increase in the number of agents one is interacting with, and therefore an increase in social complexity, with the concomitant threats of competition, conflict, and confusion. These problems too can be conceptualized most generally as a form of friction, i.e. the (generally unintended) obstruction of one agent’s actions by one or more other agents’ actions. As in the case of technological progress, the trial-and-error of evolution will tend to reduce this social friction by creating adapted institutions. Institutions, or more generally mediators, are systems that coordinate the activities of different agents so as to minimize friction and maximize synergy.
>
> A largely overlooked, but very powerful, mechanism for the spontaneous evolution of mediators is stigmergy, which relies on the medium or environment shared by the agents. Stigmergic interaction means that the change produced by one agent to the medium stimulates another agent to perform a complementary action, promoting their collective benefit even without any conscious intention to cooperate. Stigmergic activity will gradually reshape the passive medium into an active mediator, which elicits and directs the agents’ actions.
>
> The most “ephemeralized” example of the technological infrastructure underlying global connectivity is the Internet. A quick inspection shows that it provides a near ideal medium for stigmergic interaction: it instantaneously connects people all across the planet, is nearly always and everywhere available, can be used virtually without cost, is plastic enough to accommodate practically any “shape” or information that is imprinted upon it, while it will accurately register and store this information for as long as necessary. What it still lacks are the more evolved mediator functions. Yet, there already exist several examples of Internet services—such as the Google search engine or the Wikipedia website—that very successfully apply stigmergic principles to coordinate individual activities, thus offering their users a form of distributed intelligence well beyond the capabilities of a single individual.
>
> A straightforward extrapolation of this evolution that injects ever more intelligence into the Internet leads me to expect a near-term shift from World-Wide Web to Global Brain. The “Global Brain” is more than a fancy term for a large-scale intelligent system, though: the analogy runs much deeper. An analysis of the stigmergic mechanisms that seem most effective in supporting such distributed intelligence shows that they are virtually identical to the mechanisms used by the human brain. The quantitative stigmergy exemplified by “ant algorithms” is nearly identical to the process of Hebbian or reinforcement learning that differentially strengthens connections between neurons in the brain. The “ants” that trace and explore the quantitatively weighted network formed in this way correspond to human or software agents searching the web, or to bursts of activation spreading across the brain. Qualitative stigmergy, which is the true motor of innovation, can be seen as the basis of symbolic consciousness in the brain. It is exemplified on the web by a variety of collaborative, “open access” sites where people freely improve on each other’s contributions." - [Accelerating Socio-Technological Evolution: from ephemeralization and stigmergy to the global brain, by Francis Heylighen](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/AcceleratingEvolution.pdf)





> "If you think about it, the world’s citizens possess much more knowledge than a small group of individuals. What was lacking before Wikipedia was a mechanism to harness that knowledge. That was the technological breakthrough of Wikipedia: how the editors work together to find a consensus on what the articles say. So Wikipedia is an information technology that decentralizes decision-making for encyclopedia articles. Its core innovation is a mechanism that allows some of the most informed people on any topic to contribute to the articles. The result is a much better result than if these decisions were centralized." - [The Democracy of the Future, by Tomas Pueyo](https://unchartedterritories.tomaspueyo.com/p/future-of-democracy-decentralized#:~:text=If%20you%20think,decisions%20were%20centralized.)

> "Open source software has mechanisms to separate small pieces of the code for other developers to build them, and then mechanisms to merge that code back with the rest of it. Put in another way, open-source software development is an information technology that is more efficient than centralized development. It’s achieved that by finding good mechanisms to decentralize the development." - [The Democracy of the Future, by Tomas Pueyo](https://unchartedterritories.tomaspueyo.com/p/future-of-democracy-decentralized#:~:text=Open%20source%20software,decentralize%20the%20development.)
