# Permanent [URIs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Identifier)

Each account has an associated auto-increment counter (nonce) for every time they submit an anchor for off-chain content. So if an interface has submitted 4 times already, then the next submission will be with `nonce == 5`. The blockchain keeps a mapping in its state for each previous nonce value to the block number when it changed so that `<interface_id>/<nonce>` can be translated to which block has the Merkle root anchor & [IPFS CID](https://docs.ipfs.io/concepts/content-addressing/) hash for the blob that corresponds to that nonce for that account.

Once a blob is fetched through the [IPFS CID](https://docs.ipfs.io/concepts/content-addressing/) (hash) we can address specific events by utilizing the offset index in the blob header so a URI such as `<interface_id>/<nonce>/<user_id>/<content_id>` can point to a specific post, comment or even reaction. The content ID for a specific user is usually a small single digit number and is necessary only if there have been more than 1 interactions by that user through that interface for the given nonce (should be rare).

The blockchain can be queried if the interface was allowed to post content on behalf of the user through on-chain authorization (probably initiated by an [IDM](../implementation/ecosystem/IDM.md)) when that specific block was published in order to determine if the activity is authentic - the state keeps information for each account such as since what block number a given interface was authorized to post on behalf of a user (and until when - all ranges). Users may avoid using IDMs and explicitly sign their interactions in which case their signatures will be within the data blobs and the only check required will be for the keypair used for the specific block number. To recap - to prove the authenticity of any event:
- First check if the data is actually part of an anchored blob with a Merkle proof to a block.
- Then check if the user actually submitted the event:
    - Either if at that point the interface was authorized to post on behalf of the user which would require a Merkle proof for a part of the blockchain state (authorization ranges).
    - Or by checking for an explicit signature & the public key of that account at that time which would also require a Merkle proof for a part of the blockchain state (account key history).
