

# Evolution's Arrow - quotes


This is the most important book in the world.

This is a list of quotes

The book itself is one giant quote that everyone should read.

[Evolution's Arrow: the direction of evolution and the future of humanity (online)](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/EvArrow.htm), by John Stewart ([Goodreads](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/211260.Evolution_s_Arrow), [Amazon](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0646394975))


Perhaps 20-30% of the book has ended up here in the form of the most (subjectively) notable quotes.


<!-- toc -->



> "The potential benefits of cooperation will not be exhausted until all living processes in the universe are united in a single organisation of the largest possible scale. All the matter, energy and living processes of the universe will be managed into a single cooperative organisation." - [source](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/211260.Evolution_s_Arrow)

> "An organism whose motivations and objectives fail to take into account the evolutionary effects of its actions will not value objectives that do. Instead, the organism will use the immense adaptive capacity unleashed by mental modelling to get better and better at serving the goals of its existing internal reward systems." - [source](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/211260.Evolution_s_Arrow)

> "An organism will fail to be relevant to future evolution if it remains unorganised on a single planet, serving objectives and motivations established by flawed and shortsighted evolutionary mechanisms." - [source](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/211260.Evolution_s_Arrow)

> "We are an organism in which the capacity for mental modelling has not yet realised its full potential to take over and improve our evolvability." - [source](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/211260.Evolution_s_Arrow)

> "Markets include the seeds of their own destruction. They tend to produce individuals and corporations with the power to undermine the effective operation of the market." - [source](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/211260.Evolution_s_Arrow)

> "Mentally we can abstract individuals out of this on-going process and consider them as separate and independent beings. If we do this and then ask what purpose or meaning there can be in their temporary lives, we must conclude that there can be none. From the point of view of an isolated individual, the inevitability of death makes anything he does during his life irrelevant and meaningless. If there is no afterlife, whatever he does during his short life can make no difference to himself in the long run. He still ends up dead. It is impossible to find meaning in a temporary and isolated life that is not part of some ongoing process." - [source](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/211260.Evolution_s_Arrow)

> "We can live our lives as if we are separate from the on-going evolutionary process, and make no conscious contribution to it. But individuals with evolutionary awareness will not find meaning or purpose in such a life. They will find no meaning in a life spent vigorously and energetically seeking the satisfaction of their pre-existing material and emotional urges." - [source](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/211260.Evolution_s_Arrow)





████████████████████████████████████████████████
# Chapter 1. Introduction
████████████████████████████████████████████████

> "The emergence of organisms who are conscious of the direction of evolution is one of the most important steps in the evolution of life on any planet. Once organisms discover the direction of evolution, they can use it to guide their own evolution. If they know where evolution is going, they can work out what will produce success in the future, and use this to plan how they will evolve." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/1.htm#:~:text=The%20emergence%20of,they%20will%20evolve.)

> "As evolution proceeds, living things will increasingly coordinate their actions for the benefit of the group rather than acting only in their own individual interests. Cooperators will inherit the earth, and eventually the universe." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/1.htm#_ednref2:~:text=As%20evolution%20proceeds%2C%20living%20things%20will%20increasingly%20coordinate%20their%20actions%20for%20the%20benefit%20of%20the%20group%20rather%20than%20acting%20only%20in%20their%20own%20individual%20interests.%20Cooperators%20will%20inherit%20the%20earth%2C%20and%20eventually%20the%20universe%5B6%5D.)

> "One thing that is striking about this is that the cooperative groups that arose at each step in the sequence became the organisms that then teamed up to form the cooperative groups (and organisms) at the next step in the sequence. The result has been that all larger-scale living organisms are made up of smaller-scale living processes that are in turn made up of still smaller-scale processes and so on. And for the organism to operate effectively, all these layers of living processes must cooperate in the interests of the organism. All organisms, each of us included, are cooperative organisations." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/1.htm#_ednref2:~:text=One%20thing%20that,are%20cooperative%20organisations.)

> "In the evolution of life on this planet, cooperation between living processes began over very small scales and has progressively increased through the formation of larger and larger-scale cooperative groups and organisms. And in the last 10,000 years, this trend has accelerated enormously. Cooperative human groups have increased in scale from small tribal societies to nation states and empires, and now to forms of human organisation that operate on the scale of the planet (e.g. multinational companies, and economic markets)." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/1.htm#_ednref2:~:text=In%20the%20evolution%20of%20life%20on%20this,e.g.%20multinational%20companies%2C%20and%20economic%20markets).)

> "Three thousand million years ago, cooperation extended only between molecular processes that were separated by about a millionth of a metre, the scale of early cells. Now, cooperation extends between human organisms that are separated by up to 12 million metres, the scale of the planet. And by up to 380 million metres when there are moon landings." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/1.htm#_ednref2:~:text=Three%20thousand%20million,are%20moon%20landings.)

> "The advantages of being better at adapting have driven progressive improvements in the evolvability and adaptability of cooperative groups, and of the organisms they eventually produce. The processes that adapt and evolve organisms have got progressively better at discovering the most effective forms of cooperation amongst the living processes that make up the organisms. Evolution itself evolves, and living processes get smarter at evolving." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/1.htm#_ednref2:~:text=The%20advantages%20of%20being,get%20smarter%20at%20evolving.)

> "A key milestone was reached when organisms could communicate with each other about adaptive improvements they had discovered during their lives. Adaptive discoveries no longer died with the individual who made them. They could be passed on to others, and a culture of adaptive information could be developed. Once this ability evolved, the internal adaptive processes qualified as evolutionary mechanisms, able to accumulate adaptive discoveries across the generations. On this planet, only humans and our societies have evolved this capacity to a high level." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/1.htm#_ednref2:~:text=A%20key%20milestone,a%20high%20level.)

> "An organism capable of mental modelling can form internal mental models and mental pictures of how its environment will unfold in the future, and how its actions will affect this. To an extent, it can predict the future. So it is able to try out possible actions mentally, select the one that produces the best future result in its mental models, and only then try it out in practice." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/1.htm#_ednref2:~:text=An%20organism%20capable,%5B11%5D.)

> "Progressively the organisms will be able to model how their environment unfolds over wider and wider scales of space and time. Eventually the organisms will be able to model the wider-scale evolutionary processes that have produced it and will affect them in the future. For the first time they will see themselves as situated at a particular point in an on-going and progressive evolutionary process. And they will not just become aware of the direction of evolution. They will also become aware that their increasing awareness of the direction of evolution is itself a significant step in evolution." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/1.htm#_ednref2:~:text=Progressively%20the%20organisms,step%20in%20evolution.)

> "The organisms will see that their existing physical adaptations and their existing motivations, interests, beliefs, and values are all the products of their evolutionary history. These characteristics will have all been tailored and tuned by past evolution to ensure that the organism survives. As their understanding of the direction of evolution improves, they will also see what they will have to do in the future to continue their evolutionary success. The organisms will see what they have to do both as individuals and socially: they will understand that they must further exploit the benefits of cooperation by forming cooperative organisations of larger and larger scale and greater and greater evolvability." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/1.htm#_ednref2:~:text=The%20organisms%20will%20see,greater%20and%20greater%20evolvability.)

> "But will the organisms use their awareness of the direction of evolution to guide their own evolution? Will they choose to do what is necessary for future evolutionary success? Will they care about their evolutionary future? The difficulty faced by all organisms at this stage in their evolution is that they will be unlikely to find satisfaction and motivation in what they have to do for future evolutionary success. Continued success will demand radical changes in their behaviour and social organisation. But their existing motivations, moral codes, and values will influence their willingness to make these changes. The problem is that their motivations and other predispositions will have been moulded by the needs of past evolution, not future evolution. Past evolution will have tailored their motivations and values so that they find satisfaction in behaviours and actions that would have produced success in the past, not those that will produce success in the future. Up until the development of their capacity for mental modelling, they will have been adapted by evolutionary mechanisms that were without foresight, and could not take into account the needs of future evolution." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/1.htm#_ednref2:~:text=But%20will%20the,of%20future%20evolution.)

> "It is one thing for an organism to know what it has to do for future evolutionary success. It is another thing entirely to want to do something about it. It is a bit like a person who knows that it is in his longer-term interests to work long hours and save money while he is young to provide for a comfortable retirement. As many of us know, awareness of our longer-term interests will not automatically motivate us to do what is necessary to serve those interests. The difficulty in finding motivation to pursue future evolutionary success is even greater. The individual will often not benefit at all through support for evolutionary objectives. It will often be only future generations who do so." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/1.htm#_ednref2:~:text=It%20is%20one,who%20do%20so.)

> "But we will see that an organism that develops a fuller understanding of the evolutionary process and of its place in it will be more likely to break free of its biological and social past, and develop the capacity to do whatever is necessary for future success. Such an organism will become aware that its existing beliefs, motivations and values have no special validity. It knows that if its past evolutionary needs were different, its motivations and values would also be different. These predispositions will be seen as the products of shortsighted evolutionary mechanisms that have been incapable of producing the motivations and values needed for future evolutionary success." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/1.htm#_ednref2:~:text=But%20we%20will,future%20evolutionary%20success.)

> "If they can develop this psychological capacity to adapt their behaviour in whatever way is necessary, they can transcend their biological and social past. They can become self-evolving beings, able to change their behaviour and objectives by conscious choice. They will see themselves as evolutionary work-in-progress, with no fixed characteristics, able to find satisfaction and motivation in doing whatever they choose. The organism will also know that only organisms that choose to struggle to develop this psychological capacity are likely to make a significant contribution to the future evolution of life in the universe. Those who choose instead to continue to serve obsolete values and motivations will be irrelevant to life, and face eventual extinction. The organism will know that the choice that faces it is, in an evolutionary sense, a choice to be or not to be." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/1.htm#_ednref2:~:text=If%20they%20can,not%20to%20be.)

> "An organism can use its modelling capacity not only to model and manage its external environment, but also to model and manage its internal adaptive processes. It can develop mental models of the pre-existing physical, emotional, and mental adaptive processes that determine how it behaves and acts. The models will enable it to understand consciously how its pre-existing adaptive processes operate, what useful effects they have, how they might be modified, and what the consequences of this might be. Through self-knowledge they will develop the capacity to gain control over their internal adaptive processes." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/1.htm#_ednref2:~:text=an%20organism%20can%20use,their%20internal%20adaptive%20processes.)

> "Cooperation amongst humans has expanded considerably in scale over the past 100,000 years. Initially cooperation existed only within small family groups. Since then, cooperative organisation has progressively expanded in scale to produce multi-family bands, tribes, agricultural communities, cities, empires, nation states, and now some forms of economic and social organisation that span the globe." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/1.htm#_ednref2:~:text=Cooperation%20amongst%20humans,%5B14%5D.)

> "The ability of human cooperative organisation to exploit the benefits of cooperation can be greatly improved. Modern human societies are obviously not an endpoint of evolution. The organisms that play a significant role in the evolution of life in the universe will not be those that stop evolving when they reach the position we have. Guided by awareness of evolution’s arrow, they will go on to form cooperative organisations of larger and larger scale and of greater and greater evolvability. First they will form a unified planetary organisation that manages the matter, energy and living processes of the planet. Then this organisation will be progressively expanded to form still larger-scale societies of increasing evolvability. Matter, energy and life will be managed on the scale of the organism’s solar system and, eventually, its galaxy. The greater the scale of the resources the organism is able to manage, the more likely it will be able to adapt to whatever challenges it faces in its conscious pursuit of future evolutionary success." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/1.htm#_ednref2:~:text=the%20ability%20of%20human,of%20future%20evolutionary%20success.)

> "Until its citizens chose to consciously pursue future evolutionary success, the society would therefore continue to serve only the pre-existing biological and cultural needs of its members. The immense evolutionary potential of a society that could intelligently manage matter, energy and life on the scale of the planet would be used to serve values and objectives established by shortsighted and flawed evolutionary mechanisms. The enormous power of our emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence and genetic engineering would not be harnessed to achieve future evolutionary success. Instead they would be used merely to satisfy obsolete desires and values that conflict with future evolutionary needs." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/1.htm#_ednref2:~:text=Until%20its%20citizens,future%20evolutionary%20needs.)

> "A full understanding of evolution and its direction leaves an individual with very limited choices. It is not open to us to choose to ignore the dictates of evolution. Whether we choose to pursue only the values and motivations established in us by our biological and cultural past, or instead decide consciously to serve the future evolutionary interests of humanity, we will be following evolutionary objectives. The only choice is between serving goals established in us by evolutionary mechanisms that are incompetent, or by mechanisms that are the best available. We can choose to live a life that serves obsolete evolutionary goals established by inferior and shortsighted evolutionary mechanisms. Or we can use awareness of the direction of evolution to guide how we can consciously contribute to the future evolutionary success of humanity." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/1.htm#_ednref2:~:text=a%20full%20understanding,success%20of%20humanity.)

> "Once individuals become aware of the direction of evolution, if they decide to continue to serve the dictates of past evolution they are choosing evolutionary failure, in the full knowledge that they are doing so. Individuals that make such a decision are choosing a life that is meaningless, absurd and ridiculous from an evolutionary perspective, and know that they are making such a choice.
>
> Individuals who instead use the direction of evolution to guide their actions obtain a clear answer to one of the most central questions of their existence: “What should I do with my life?” They see that they should do what they can to promote the awareness of the direction of evolution amongst others and to develop in themselves and in others the psychological capacity to do what is necessary for future evolutionary success. They will also want to contribute to the formation of a cooperative and evolvable planetary society that manages the matter, energy and living processes of the planet to form organisations of yet larger scale and of greater evolvability. And they will be aware that their actions are contributing to the next great step in the evolution of life on earth." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/1.htm#_ednref2:~:text=Once%20individuals%20become,life%20on%20earth.)

> "One of the most important steps in the evolution of life on any planet is the emergence of organisms who are conscious of the direction of evolution and who use this to guide their own evolution. The actions of individuals who are living now can help ensure that the organism that achieves this milestone on earth will be us." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/1.htm#_ednref2:~:text=life%20on%20earth.-,One%20of%20the%20most%20important%20steps%20in%20the%20evolution%20of%20life,the%20organism%20that%20achieves%20this%20milestone%20on%20earth%20will%20be%20us.,-%5B%C2%A0Previous%C2%A0Chapter)

████████████████████████████████████████████████
# Chapter 2. The Causes of Progress
████████████████████████████████████████████████

> "Technological progress has opened up the potential to improve the living standards of all people on this planet. But this potential for social improvement has not been fully exploited this century. It has not driven on-going social progress. Instead, at the end of the 20th century over 800 million people are chronically undernourished, and each year nearly 13 million under fives die as a direct or indirect result of hunger and malnutrition. In industrialised countries, many people spend much of their lives in unsatisfying, boring and meaningless work, while large numbers choose drugs over reality.
>
> Human society has failed to produce on-going social progress in these areas because it does not include a mechanism that selects and reproduces social improvements when they are discovered or proposed. If society stumbles on improvements either by accident or by conscious effort, there is no process that locks in the improvements and perpetuates them. The economic and political markets that select and reproduce technological advances do not do the same for social improvements.
>
> As we shall consider in detail later in this book, it is possible to organise human society so that social improvements are selected and reproduced, and so that social progress is as inevitable, unstoppable and natural as technological progress. And we will see that evolutionary success for humanity will ultimately depend on organising ourselves in this way." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/2.htm#:~:text=Technological%20progress%20has,in%20this%20way.)

> "In the case of the mechanisms that adapt individuals, possible improvements are developed, tried out, and selected at the level of the individual human, cell or ant. But in the case of organisational adaptation, it is the collective activity of many individual humans, cells or ants that search for and reproduce adaptations. Through these processes the organisation can solve adaptive problems collectively that individuals cannot. Just as our brain solves problems that are not understood by any cell in the brain, human markets and governments can solve adaptive problems that are not fully understood by any individual." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/2.htm#:~:text=In%20the%20case%20of%20the,fully%20understood%20by%20any%20individual.)

> "The genetic mechanism is unable to do this. It cannot directly combine adaptations discovered in different species. When a relatively general advance such as a better eye is discovered, there is no process that enables it to be immediately adopted by all those species that have inferior eyes. Again we find that although genetic evolution is as fundamentally progressive as technological evolution due to the existence of similar potentials for on-going improvement, it is far inferior at exploiting these potentials." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/2.htm#:~:text=The%20genetic%20mechanism%20is,at%20exploiting%20these%20potentials.)

> "The potential for further beneficial cooperation will not be finally exhausted until all living processes are permanently organised into a single entity that is of the largest possible scale. The potential for increases in the scale of cooperation in this universe will end only when the entire universe is subsumed in a single, unified cooperative organisation of living processes. It will end only when the matter, energy and living processes of the universe are managed into a super organism on the scale of the universe." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/2.htm#:~:text=The%20potential%20for%20further,scale%20of%20the%20universe.)

████████████████████████████████████████████████
# Chapter 3. Why Cooperate?
████████████████████████████████████████████████

> "Like the goods and services produced in human society, the key functions of the human body are all the product of the coordinated activities of thousand and thousands of differently-specialised and interdependent cells. If this cooperation breaks down, so to do our bodies. Cancer is one example of what happens when cells go their own way at the expense of the body.
>
> And the cells themselves are cooperative organisations. Without extensive cooperation between the molecular processes and organelles that make up cells, we would not exist. Each of our million billion cells is made up of thousands of incredibly small and intricate parts that cooperate together to produce the functions of the cell. At the molecular level, a human cell may contain up to 100,000 different proteins. Proteins are differentiated and specialised in many ways: some provide support for the components of the cell, some form part of the cell membrane, some have the ability to contract, moving the cell or parts within it, and many are specific enzymes that regulate the essential chemical reactions that enable the cell to function. Often these enzymes cooperate to form teams in which each member regulates a particular step in a sequence of reactions.
>
> Just as humans team up to form corporations, and cells are organised into organs, groups of molecules may also form larger structures called organelles. These too are differentiated and specialised, with mitochondria, the so-called power houses of the cell, releasing and converting energy for use in the cell, ribosomes providing sites for putting together proteins, the nucleus housing most of the genetic material, and lysosomes providing places in which food can be digested without dissolving other parts of the cell." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/3.htm#:~:text=Like%20the%20goods,%5B2%5D.)

> "In summary, we are cooperators that are made of cooperators that are made of cooperators and so on. It is cooperation all the way down." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/3.htm#:~:text=In%20summary%2C%20we%20are%20cooperators%20that%20are%20made%20of%20cooperators%20that%20are%20made%20of%20cooperators%20and%20so%20on.%20It%20is%20cooperation%20all%20the%20way%20down.)

> "The key to the success of cooperation is that combinations of individuals whose activities are coordinated can do things better than individuals, and can do things that individuals cannot." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/3.htm#:~:text=The%20key%20to%20the%20success%20of%20cooperation%20is%20that%20combinations%20of%20individuals%20whose%20activities%20are%20coordinated%20can%20do%20things%20better%20than%20individuals%2C%20and%20can%20do%20things%20that%20individuals%20cannot.)

> "One of the main ways in which cooperation enables things to be done better is through specialisation and division of labour. In a cooperative organisation, every individual does not have to do everything needed for survival. Instead, an individual can specialise in a particular task, performing the task not only for itself but also for others in the group. This lets the others specialise in other tasks for the group. The result is a highly interdependent organisation in which key tasks are performed by individuals who are specially adapted and equipped to do them." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/3.htm#:~:text=One%20of%20the,%5B3%5D.)

> "So wherever evolution has been able to fully exploit the benefits of cooperation, we always find the extraordinary level of specialisation and interdependency that results from a high degree of division of labour. We find it within cells, within our bodies, within our social systems, and between nations. And there is every reason to believe it will also be a feature of organisations that are capable of future evolutionary success on even larger scales." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/3.htm#:~:text=So%20wherever%20evolution,even%20larger%20scales.)

> "But it is not only through a division of labour that cooperation provides advantages. Cooperation is also able to exploit the fact that combinations often have new features that their components do not. Combinations can do things that individuals cannot." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/3.htm#:~:text=But%20it%20is%20not%20only%20through%20a%20division%20of%20labour%20that%20cooperation%20provides%20advantages.%20Cooperation%20is%20also%20able%20to%20exploit%20the%20fact%20that%20combinations%20often%20have%20new%20features%20that%20their%20components%20do%20not%5B5%5D.%20Combinations%20can%20do%20things%20that%20individuals%20cannot.)

> "Similarly, combinations of living things can also do things that individuals cannot: amino acids, the building blocks of proteins, are unable to regulate chemical reactions in the cell by themselves. But when combined to form protein enzymes, they can control and manipulate other atoms and molecules, determining how they react and what larger molecules are constructed in the cell. A flock of birds or a troop of baboons is able to detect stalking predators that individuals are unable to. And combinations of cells in our bodies form tubes to carry blood, teeth that enable us to chew food, and many other useful structures that individual cells cannot." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/3.htm#:~:text=Similarly%2C%20combinations%20of,individual%20cells%20cannot.)

> "Cooperative combinations can also have significant evolutionary advantages because of their larger scale. For example, larger-scale organisms can have adaptations that are more complex. A bacterium could not evolve a brain as complex as ours. This level of complexity was possible only after billions of cells teamed up to form multicellular organisms." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/3.htm#:~:text=Cooperative%20combinations%20can,form%20multicellular%20organisms.)

> "But more importantly, the ability to form larger-scale cooperative groups enables organisms to manage and manipulate their environment over larger scales. Large human organisations can operate mines, build dams and establish communications networks of a scale unimaginable to small bands of earlier humans. A human social system organised on the scale of the planet is likely to be able to develop the capacity to prevent large asteroids from colliding with the planet. Dinosaurs and bacteria have been unable to adapt on a sufficient scale to do this." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/3.htm#:~:text=But%20more%20importantly,to%20do%20this.)

> "A further very general advantage of cooperation is that it can prevent the harmful effects of destructive competition. Non-cooperating individuals pursue their own interests even where this damages the interests of others. A population of such individuals will damage each other’s interests, and all will loose." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/3.htm#:~:text=A%20further%20very,all%20will%20loose.)

> "The advantages of cooperation mean that a whole world of new adaptive opportunities is opened whenever living processes team up to form a cooperative organisation. This has clearly been the case when molecular processes teamed up to form cells, when cells teamed up to form multicellular organisms, and when humans teamed up to form social systems. Each of these levels of cooperative organisation has been able to conquer new environments and develop adaptations unknown to the levels that preceded them. We can be sure that new evolutionary opportunities will also be opened up as human organisation expands to the scale of the planet and beyond. Exactly what these new opportunities will be, we cannot know with certainty. The adaptive opportunities that were opened up by the move from single cells to multicellular organisms are unimaginable from the point of view of a single cell and its life experiences. What could the trunk of an elephant, the wings of a bird, the heart of a deer, or a jet aircraft possibly mean to a cell? But what we can know with certainty is that by expanding the scale of human cooperative organisation we will open up greater adaptive capabilities. And as we shall see in later chapters, it will increase the chances that humanity can play a significant role in the future evolution of life in the universe." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/3.htm#:~:text=The%20advantages%20of%20cooperation%20mean,of%20life%20in%20the%20universe.)

> "The advantages of cooperation are general. They apply to cooperation between any living processes. They do not depend on the existence of any special local circumstances or conditions. Any organisms, whether of the same species or not, can benefit from the evolution of suitable cooperative relationships between them. Whatever the evolutionary challenges faced by organisms, they can meet them more effectively through cooperation." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/3.htm#:~:text=the%20advantages%20of%20cooperation%20are,them%20more%20effectively%20through%20cooperation.)

> "The advantages continue to apply no matter how large cooperative organisation becomes. The advantages do not cease once cooperative organisation reaches a particular scale. Further increases in cooperation will deliver further evolutionary advantages. Increases in the scale of cooperative organisation did not stop providing advantages once cooperation reached the scale of a single cell, or the scale of multicellular organisms, or of human villages. In all these cases, the potential benefits of cooperation between organisations of the largest scale continued to drive the progressive evolution of cooperation." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/3.htm#:~:text=the%20advantages%20continue,evolution%20of%20cooperation.)

> "No matter what the scale of cooperative organisation, greater benefits will be achieved by further increases in scale, whether by the expansion of existing organisations, or by the evolution of cooperation between organisations of the largest scale. Living processes that cooperate over the scale of a solar system will have much greater adaptive capabilities and opportunities than us. But their abilities will be far inferior to organisms that cooperate to manage the matter, energy and living resources of a galaxy. The potential benefits of cooperation can be expected to continue to drive increases in the scale of cooperative organisation at least until the universe is organised into a single cooperative organisation of living processes." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/3.htm#:~:text=No%20matter%20what,of%20living%20processes.)

> "The potential benefits of cooperation can drive progressive evolution only to the extent that evolution is capable of exploiting the benefits. If evolution is unable to find ways to make cooperation work, progressive evolution will stall. This is a serious difficulty if the views of many mainstream biologists are correct. Most evolutionary theorists believe that evolution is very poor at organising cooperation, and that self-interested organisms will usually win evolutionary struggles. Consistent with this, there are many instances in the world around us where evolution seems unable to organise cooperation." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/3.htm#:~:text=the%20potential%20benefits%20of%20cooperation%20can%20drive,where%20evolution%20seems%20unable%20to%20organise%20cooperation.)

████████████████████████████████████████████████
# Chapter 4. Barriers to Cooperation
████████████████████████████████████████████████

> "We humans are obviously only partial cooperators. It is true that human economies can be spectacularly cooperative with an extraordinary specialisation and division of labour. It is also clear that internally, within our own bodies, we are cooperative all the way down. But anyone who tries to convince us that humans are always cooperators has a hard job in front of them.
>
> The 20th century has seen millions killed in the largest wars in human history. Hundreds of millions of people in the world are chronically underfed, even though there are sufficient resources to feed us all. Millions die each year as a result. Thousands of millions will live and die without having any chance to obtain the knowledge and skills needed to participate effectively in a modern economy. They will not share in the understanding of the world and of ourselves that has been made possible by the growth of human knowledge. They will live and die without fulfilling the potential for personal development and self-awareness that is possible at this time in the evolution of humanity. And individuals, corporations and countries continue to pollute and degrade our environment even though they know they are damaging the lives of others, now and into the future.
>
> On a smaller scale, most of us do not feel that we are cooperators. There are strict limits to what we are prepared to give up for the common good. We know that tens of thousands die each year from starvation. But most of us will not sacrifice much to save any of them. We do not do for others what we would have them do for us.
>
> We are very choosy about whom we will cooperate with: we are more comfortable cooperating with people who are likely to return any favours and to share the benefits of cooperation with us. So we cooperate more with family, friends and people we know we can trust. We are far more wary about cooperating with strangers. Before we do so, we want to be sure the strangers are trustworthy, or are put in a position where they will not take more than their fair share of the benefits of cooperation. For example, where the cooperation is a business venture we might insist on an enforceable contract, or that the investments and profits are not solely under the control of the stranger." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/4.htm#:~:text=We%20humans%20are,of%20the%20stranger.)

> "If cooperation is so good, why is cooperation between animals so scarce and underdeveloped? There is no controversy amongst evolutionists about the answer. Cooperation does not evolve easily. There is a fundamental barrier to the evolution of cooperation." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/4.htm#:~:text=If%20cooperation%20is%20so%20good%2C%20why%20is%20cooperation%20between%20animals%20so%20scarce%20and%20underdeveloped%3F%20There%20is%20no%20controversy%20amongst%20evolutionists%20about%20the%20answer.%20Cooperation%20does%20not%20evolve%20easily.%20There%20is%20a%20fundamental%20barrier%20to%20the%20evolution%20of%20cooperation.)

> "In most circumstances, the only features that natural selection will produce in animals are those that benefit the individual. No matter how much a feature benefits the group or the species, it will not evolve unless it also benefits the individual. So if a feature causes an animal to help others without any benefit to itself, the feature will die out. And it will die out even if the benefits provided to others far outweigh the costs to the cooperator." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/4.htm#:~:text=In%20most%20circumstances,%5B2%5D.)

> "Evolutionary struggles tend to be won by genes that cause individuals to put their own interests ahead of the interests of others. The useful effects that an individual has on others will not improve its own competitive ability. Only the effects it has on itself will do this. This essentially is the ‘selfish gene’ perspective that has been argued so persuasively by writers such as Richard Dawkins and George Williams.
>
> They have shown that there is a fundamental barrier to the evolution of cooperation amongst animals that can be overcome only in limited circumstances. Even though cooperation can provide significant advantages, the genetic evolutionary mechanism is not very effective at exploiting them. The ‘selfish gene’ perspective can successfully explain why we see only limited cooperation amongst animals." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/4.htm#:~:text=Evolutionary%20struggles%20tend,cooperation%20amongst%20animals.)

> "Evolution will not progress if the barrier to the evolution of cooperation is insurmountable. This threat is even greater once we recognise that the barrier to the evolution of cooperation does not apply only to the animals we see around us. It is not just genetic evolution that is restricted by the barrier. The ‘selfish gene’ perspective can easily be extended to show that a similar barrier applies to the evolution of cooperation amongst all other living processes. It applies to cooperation amongst human organisations, individual humans, single cells, and molecular processes." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/4.htm#:~:text=Evolution%20will%20not,%5B5%5D.)

> "Cooperation emerges only where evolution discovers how to build cooperative organisations out of self-interested components." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/4.htm#:~:text=cooperation%20emerges%20only%20where%20evolution%20discovers%20how%20to%20build%20cooperative%20organisations%20out%20of%20self%2Dinterested%20components.)

> "Consider human corporations that sell their products in a highly competitive market. The corporations that are less efficient will tend to be out-competed, and will go out of business or be taken over. What will happen if the most efficient way corporations can make their products also pollutes the environment? Any corporation that cooperates with the community by reducing pollution will be less efficient and will go out of business. The corporations that pursue only their own interests will be more competitive, and will pollute. No matter how good the intentions of a corporation, it cannot stop polluting if it is to survive. And it does not matter whether it is run by responsible people who genuinely care about the environment. All they will achieve if they steer the corporation towards environmental responsibility is to send it broke.
>
> The so-called “free rider problem” undermines cooperation in many human activities. For example, it prevents businesses in an industry from cooperating together to train sufficient employees for the industry. If an industry is to be successful and to expand, enough workers must be trained in the general skills needed in that industry. However, businesses that make the investment needed to train employees can have their trained employees poached by other companies. This will often happen before the businesses have got a good return on their investment in training." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/4.htm#:~:text=Consider%20human%20corporations,investment%20in%20training.)

> "Free riding occurs wherever individuals, whether they are molecular processes, cells, animals, humans or organisations of humans, can get the benefits of cooperation without contributing to its costs. Free riders will always end up ahead of cooperators who use energy or resources by cooperating. Wherever free riding is possible, it undermines cooperation." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/4.htm#:~:text=Free%20riding%20occurs,it%20undermines%20cooperation.)

> "We can conclude confidently that the barrier to the evolution of cooperation applies to all living processes. The circumstances that cause it are universal. Individuals who use resources to help others without benefit to themselves will be out-competed. They will be disadvantaged compared with those who use the resources for their own benefit. And the barrier applies no matter what the evolutionary mechanisms that adapt and evolve individuals. In the examples we have considered, the barrier has applied whether the evolutionary mechanisms are those that adapt corporations, individual humans, other multicellular organisms, single cells, or autocatalytic sets.
>
> This barrier makes it difficult for evolutionary mechanisms to take advantage of the potential benefits of cooperation. It makes it difficult, but not impossible. If the barrier completely prevented the evolution of cooperation, evolution would not progress. But as we shall see in the next three Chapters, the barrier is not insurmountable. Evolution can exploit the advantages of cooperation by finding ways to make cooperation pay for the individuals who cooperate. To evolve, cooperation must be organised so that it is in the interests of individuals." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/4.htm#:~:text=We%20can%20conclude,interests%20of%20individuals.)

> "If evolution is to progress, it must meet this central challenge: it must discover ways of building cooperative organisations out of self-interested components—it must learn how to make it in the interests of individuals to cooperate." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/4.htm#:~:text=if%20evolution%20is%20to%20progress%2C%20it%20must%20meet%20this%20central%20challenge%3A%20it%20must%20discover%20ways%20of%20building%20cooperative%20organisations%20out%20of%20self%2Dinterested%20components%E2%80%94it%20must%20learn%20how%20to%20make%20it%20in%20the%20interests%20of%20individuals%20to%20cooperate.)

> "Evolution has had only limited success in building cooperative organisations of greater scale than multicellular organisms. To date, human society is as far as it has progressed. However, as we have seen, human organisation is nowhere near as spectacularly cooperative as the components of cells and as the cells within animals. The potential for beneficial cooperation amongst humans and other organisms on this planet is far from exhausted, and will continue to drive progressive evolution. We are only a step along this way. We are evolutionary work-in-progress. And as we shall see in detail, evolution’s next great challenge on earth is our challenge. To progress, evolution must discover ways to expand and improve cooperative organisation on this planet. Whether this occurs in the near future depends on us. The only evolutionary mechanisms on earth that are capable of discovering these improvements operate through our minds and our social systems." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/4.htm#:~:text=evolution%20has%20had%20only,and%20our%20social%20systems.)

████████████████████████████████████████████████
# Chapter 5. Organising Cooperation
████████████████████████████████████████████████

> "The first major breakthrough in understanding how cooperation might evolve between multicellular animals came with the publication of William Hamilton’s theory of genetical kin selection in 1964. The central idea in the mechanism he described is very simple: consider a cooperator who shares its food with others who have not been able to gather enough. If the cooperator shares food only with other individuals who contain copies of its cooperator gene, the benefits of cooperation will go only to other cooperators. Only those who carry the cooperator gene will benefit. Non-cooperators will be excluded from any of the advantages of cooperation." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/5.htm#_ednref1:~:text=The%20first%20major,advantages%20of%20cooperation.)

> "Kin selection is a very poor mechanism for evolving cooperation. Because relatedness is an imperfect indicator of common genes, kin selection can evolve cooperation only where the benefits from cooperation far outweigh the costs. This leaves an immense amount of beneficial cooperation that cannot be evolved by kin selection. If a mechanism is to be able to fully explore the benefits of cooperation, it must be able to establish any cooperation in which the benefits outweigh the costs. Kin selection falls far short of this. Without these severe limitations, kin selection would have been much better at organising cooperation amongst the animals around us. The potential benefits of cooperation would have driven the evolution of a complex division of labour within each population of animals, similar to what we see within our societies, our bodies, and our cells.
>
> But as a theory, kin selection has been very successful. The ineffectiveness of the kin selection mechanism is consistent with the sparse and limited cooperation found amongst multicellular animals. And where there is cooperation, the way it is organised is consistent with kin selection. Much of the cooperative organisation we find amongst the animals around us is between relatives." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/5.htm#_ednref1:~:text=kin%20selection%20is,is%20between%20relatives)

> "The second mechanism that enables cooperation to evolve between animals is reciprocal altruism. Again, the basic idea is very simple: an individual will not be disadvantaged if it helps another provided the other helps it in return. The individual’s initial costs of cooperating will be recouped when the other returns the favour. If the benefits of cooperation outweigh the costs, both individuals can end up in front. The cooperators will therefore out-compete individuals that don’t reciprocally help each other in this way.
>
> For example, when an individual is successful in collecting food, it might share it with others who have not been so lucky. On occasions when others are more successful, they can return the previous favour by sharing their food. Over time, all will be better off than if they did not share." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/5.htm#_ednref1:~:text=The%20second%20mechanism,did%20not%20share.)

> "It turned out that those who were given blood were bats who had given the individual blood in the past. And those who were refused blood were those who had previously refused the individual blood. The bats knew each other as individuals, knew who were likely to return favours and who were not, and chose to give blood only to those who were likely to reciprocate." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/5.htm#_ednref1:~:text=It%20turned%20out,likely%20to%20reciprocate.)

> "It turned out that those who were given blood were bats who had given the individual blood in the past. And those who were refused blood were those who had previously refused the individual blood. The bats knew each other as individuals, knew who were likely to return favours and who were not, and chose to give blood only to those who were likely to reciprocate.
>
> A closer understanding of reciprocal altruism and of its limitations shows that the bats have to be this choosey. In fact, reciprocal altruism cannot be established in a group of organisms unless they are capable of refusing to cooperate with individuals that fail to return favours. If an individual continues to do favours for others that do not return the favour, the non-reciprocators will win out. An individual that cheats by receiving favours but not repaying them will gain all the benefits of cooperation without paying any of the costs. And if a cheat is within a large population of cooperators, it will do extremely well, collecting favours and never returning them. In these circumstances, cheats will prosper, increasing in numbers in the population until all cooperators die out. In such a group, the most competitive strategy will be to accept favours but not reciprocate. Reciprocal altruism will not survive, even if its benefits far outweigh its costs.
>
> However, all this changes if the individuals live together for a long time, repeatedly have the opportunity to exchange favours, and have the capacity to remember which individuals return favours, and which do not. If these conditions are met, cheats will not be able to continually take benefits from the cooperators, because they will be recognised as cheats and excluded from further cooperation. Once this happens, they will not gain any of the benefits of cooperation. In contrast, cooperators will end up in front because they will limit their exchange of favours to those who have shown they will return the favours. If they cooperate in this way whenever the benefits outweigh the costs, cooperators will out-compete cheats." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/5.htm#_ednref1:~:text=It%20turned%20out,%5B10%5D.)

> "The whole system of reciprocity works only if there is a fair balance between the favours that are exchanged. Individuals whose favours cost more than the individuals receive in return will be out-competed. But most animals have little ability to judge whether reciprocal favours are similar in value. And having to do so further complicates the critically important job of telling the difference between cheats and cooperators.
>
> All these challenges become almost impossible when acts of cooperation benefit many others, and impact differently on each of them. If a cooperative act benefits a number of others in the group, rather than a specific individual, it is much harder to work out who owes who what, and how much. But unless individuals can keep track of all this, cheats will flourish
>
> The great advantage of reciprocal altruism over kin selection is that it can evolve cooperation between individuals who are not related. However, the conditions under which it works are so limited that it has not been very significant in establishing cooperation between animals. Not many animals live together for long periods, repeatedly have the opportunity to cooperate, are able to recognise each other as individuals, can remember how each individual behaved each time it had the opportunity to cooperate, and can keep track of favours owed and favours earned. Cases of reciprocal altruism have been found only in a few species of animals such as vampire bats, dolphins, and elephants, and in some species of monkeys and apes.
>
> Of course, the species that meets these conditions to the highest degree is us. And the theory of reciprocal altruism fits very well with the way we relate and cooperate with people that we meet repeatedly. It works well for explaining key aspects of the cooperative relationships between people in tribal groups, closely knit communities, and in friendship networks and other stable social groupings.
>
> The theory predicts that successful reciprocal altruists will have two great concerns in their relationships with others. First, they will not want to be cheated by others, so they will want to know who can be trusted to return favours. Second, they will want others to choose them as cooperative partners, so that they can share in the benefits of cooperation. They will want others to see them as trustworthy cooperators. They will not want to be seen as a cheat that should be excluded from beneficial cooperation.
>
> Consistent with this, we humans have many behaviours that seem to serve the function of protecting us against cheating. For example, we tend to have an extraordinary interest in judging other people’s trustworthiness and honesty. A major part of gossip and other social communication involves swapping information that helps us to make and update these judgements. We are also reluctant to risk cooperating with strangers when we have no knowledge of their reputation and character. We are even more reluctant when we know the stranger does not depend on us for future cooperative opportunities. In these circumstances, they will lose little if they destroy their reputation with us.
>
> We are also very concerned to protect our own reputation for trustworthiness and honesty, particularly amongst those that we spend a lot of time with. We often react instantly and emotionally to any attack on these aspects of our character. Most of us are also concerned to ensure that we are seen to treat our friends fairly whenever there are things to be shared, and that we repay our obligations to people we know. And we do not want to enter into obligations with friends that we might not be able to repay.
>
> But even amongst humans, the capacity of reciprocal altruism to establish cooperation is severely limited, even where cooperation produces substantial benefits. As we have seen, reciprocal altruism will work only where cheats can be successfully excluded from future cooperation. This will not be the case if cheats can easily find other individuals to deal with who know nothing of their previous actions. It is only where individuals have no option but to continue living and interacting together for long periods that cheating will not pay. If an individual earns a reputation for cheating in these circumstances, it will not find other cooperators to deal with.
>
> This condition is not generally met in modern large-scale economic markets. Individuals can readily leave a bad reputation behind them, and find new individuals to deal with who are unaware of their previous actions. Reciprocal altruism is therefore not the mechanism that has produced the large-scale markets that organise economic exchanges across human societies.
>
> The other great limitation of reciprocal altruism is that it is only effective where the benefits of cooperation can be neatly parcelled up, precisely valued, and swapped between individuals. Where the benefits of a cooperative act impact on many individuals, reciprocal altruism cannot operate easily. This is a significant limitation. In the complex, differentiated cooperative organisation that are cells, organisms, and human societies, most cooperative acts impact on many others in the organisation. It would be impossible to separate out the effects and keep track of them as favours that have to be returned. And if favours are not returned with acts of similar value, reciprocal altruism fails.
>
> So genetical kin selection and reciprocal altruism are not the mechanisms that have enabled evolution to explore the potential benefits of cooperation within cells, multicellular organisms, and human society. And they are not the mechanisms that will change humans from partial cooperators into full cooperators. They can achieve only limited cooperation under restricted conditions. If kin selection and reciprocal altruism were the only mechanisms that evolution could use to organise cooperation, evolution would not be progressive. It would not be able to exploit the benefits of cooperation by progressively building cooperative organisations of wider and wider scale." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/5.htm#_ednref1:~:text=the%20whole%20system,and%20wider%20scale.)

> "Where the mechanisms fail, both do so for the same reason. They fail to the extent that cooperators do not capture the benefits of their cooperation." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/5.htm#_ednref1:~:text=Where%20the%20mechanisms%20fail%2C%20both%20do%20so%20for%20the%20same%20reason.%20They%20fail%20to%20the%20extent%20that%20cooperators%20do%20not%20capture%20the%20benefits%20of%20their%20cooperation.)

> "This analysis of kin selection and reciprocal altruism points to what a mechanism must do if it is to be capable of establishing cooperation whenever cooperation is worthwhile. It must ensure that cooperators capture the benefits of their cooperative actions. Free riders, cheats and thieves who contribute nothing to the cooperation must capture none of the benefits created by cooperation.
>
> To overcome the barrier to cooperation fully, a mechanism must also ensure that those who harm others capture the effects of any harm they cause. Harming others must be harmful to those who cause it. And to organise cooperation across generations, a mechanism must also ensure that all the effects of actions on others must be captured, no matter how distant in the future the effects may be. This is necessary to ensure that cooperation that benefits future generations will also be profitable to those who produce it." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/5.htm#_ednref1:~:text=This%20analysis%20of,who%20produce%20it.)

> "A mechanism that ensures individuals capture all the effects of their actions would completely overcome the barrier to the evolution of cooperation. If individuals capture the effects of their actions on others, self-interest would no longer stop an individual from helping another. Helping the other would be as profitable to the individual as helping itself. As a result, the individual would treat the other as it would treat itself. And it would do so without giving up its self-interest in any way. It would be in the interests of the individual to treat the other as self. Anything it could do to help the other would help itself. Anything it could do to harm the other would harm itself. The individual would benefit as much from discovering new ways to help others as it would from finding new ways to help itself directly. All this holds true whether it is individual cooperators or cooperators as a class who capture the effects on others of their actions." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/5.htm#_ednref1:~:text=A%20mechanism%20that,of%20their%20actions.)

> "Wherever complex cooperation has been able to evolve, it is because cooperators have been able to capture the effects on others of their actions. As a result, self-interest has driven them to treat the other as self. A strong example that may not be immediately obvious is an economic market. The market will reward an individual who develops a new product that benefits others by satisfying their needs better than existing products. Selling the product enables the individual to capture the beneficial effects that the product has on others. In the limited areas where economic markets work effectively, individuals benefit in this way from actions that benefit others. Where the market enables individuals to capture the benefits of their effects on others, the market aligns the interests of individuals with the interests of others.
>
> In contrast, where the barrier to the evolution of cooperation has not yet been overcome, cooperators do not capture the beneficial effects on others of their actions. For example, in our economic system, a person will not capture the benefits of providing food to people who are starving in an African famine. It would be far more profitable to invent an improved mousetrap. Or a new weapon of mass destruction. But when the barriers to cooperation in human society are overcome, and when all individuals capture in full their beneficial effects on others, the provision of food to the starving will be a lucrative way to make a living.
>
> So a mechanism that ensures that cooperators capture the effects of their actions on others would allow cooperation to be established wherever cooperation is worthwhile. Organisms that pursue only their own interests would act cooperatively. The mechanism would establish cooperation between organisms whose basic nature is greedy and selfish." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/5.htm#_ednref1:~:text=Wherever%20complex%20cooperation,greedy%20and%20selfish.)

> "One general way in which cooperators could capture the effects of their actions on others is if another individual takes action to ensure this happens. The other individual could do this by providing cooperators with benefits that reflect the useful effects of the cooperators on others, and by punishing those who harm others." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/5.htm#_ednref1:~:text=One%20general%20way,who%20harm%20others.)

> "These three examples illustrate how a manager can control a group of individuals in ways that enable the potential benefits of cooperation to be explored. Left to themselves, a group of individuals that interact as equals is unable to establish complex cooperative organisation. It will not be in the interests of any member of the group to initiate this cooperation, no matter how great the benefits that it can provide. This is because individuals will not capture the benefits of cooperation that they initiate, particularly in the face of cheating, free riding and theft.
>
> This all changes when an extra layer of organisation is added to the group. This extra layer is the manager, made up of one or more entities who are able to control the group. The addition of this extra layer converts the original organisation of equals into what can be called a vertical organisation. Extending this terminology, the original organisation that had only one layer of organisation can be referred to as a horizontal organisation.
>
> The manager can use its power to organise the horizontal group in whatever way is necessary to ensure that cooperators, free riders and cheats capture the effects of their actions on others in the organisation. To the extent that the manager is successful in doing this, the interests of all individuals will be aligned with the interests of the group, and individuals will treat others as they treat themselves. Self-interest will be the same as group interest, and the vertical organisation will have successfully created cooperative organisation out of self-interested components.
>
> The manager of an ideal vertical organisation will be able to support and sustain whatever cooperative arrangements are best for the group. By determining which individuals succeed in the group and which don’t, an ideal manager will be able to construct whatever organisation is needed for evolutionary success. The ideal manager will be able to make it in the evolutionary interests of members of the group to undertake whatever forms of cooperation are best. There will be no form of cooperative organisation that the manager cannot construct. Management will be able to produce any pattern of specialisation and any form of division of labour amongst the members of the group. The barrier to the evolution of cooperation will be completely overcome.
>
> It is worth emphasising that the manager must have the capacity to control the group if the manager is to be able to organise complex cooperative organisation. If the manager is to stop cheats, free riders and thieves, it must have power over them. It must be able to make them do things that would not otherwise be in their interests, and they must not be able to avoid this control by influencing the manager in return. If they can, they can escape control, and continue to undermine cooperation. This is what happens when criminals use bribery to influence police, and when friendships with staff undermine the ability of an executive to manage staff in a corporation.
>
> Individuals that are equals within a horizontal organisation obviously cannot impose the level of control needed to stop cheats, free riders and thieves. Individuals that band together to act as a group can achieve some control over cheats. But when they do this they are no longer acting as individuals. They are forming a manager and a new level of organisation that can control individuals." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/5.htm#_ednref1:~:text=These%20three%20examples,can%20control%20individuals.)

> "the factors that control cheats and free riders have not evolved because they help cooperation get established. They have evolved for other reasons, and the restrictions they place on the opportunities for cheating and free riding are chance side effects. So the restrictions are not tuned by evolution to be as effective as possible at promoting cooperation, and they will not adapt to stay effective when things change.
>
> What vertical organisation does is take the control of cheats out of the hands of restrictions that have evolved for other reasons. As we shall see in the next Chapter, the controls established by managers are tuned by evolution specifically to promote cooperation. Controls that are best at promoting cooperation will win evolutionary struggles. And evolution will adapt the controls to find better ways to support cooperation and to prevent cheats and free riders from escaping control as they evolve.
>
> For all these reasons, only vertical organisation has the capacity to support the extraordinary level of cooperation we find within cells, multicellular organisms, and human society." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/5.htm#_ednref1:~:text=the%20factors%20that,and%20human%20society.)

> "If it is not in the evolutionary interests of managers to organise cooperation, the barrier to cooperation cannot be overcome. And unless evolution is able to find comprehensive ways to overcome the barrier, it will not be able to progressively build cooperative organisations of wider and wider scales.
>
> To a person at the turn of the 20th century, the answer to these questions might seem obvious. There is plenty of evidence from recent human history to show that if you give a person power over others, the power is likely to be abused. Power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely. In the 20th century individuals such as Stalin and Hitler who have had the most power seem to have been responsible for the most human deaths and misery.
>
> Time and time again we have seen rulers and governments sacrifice the interests and often the lives of their people in order to stay in power. Many governments have been guilty of persecuting minorities on the basis of their religious beliefs, ideology or race. White South Africans and Australians are notorious for their exploitation and abuse of the indigenous peoples of their countries. And those who have the wealth to influence governments have never been shy about getting governments to use their immense power to favour them over others.
>
> And there is abuse of power all the way down, at all scales. An extraordinary number of catholic priests have used their position to sexually abuse children, and, for most of the 20th century, the hierarchy of their church used its power to hide these practices and to protect the guilty. Even within families, individuals with greater power will often abuse others physically, sexually, emotionally or economically. And anyone who has worked in a large corporation knows that executives use their power over employees for many purposes that have little to do with the efficiency of the organisation.
>
> These abuses have obscured the fact that the extraordinary level of cooperative organisation found within cells, organisms and human society has been achieved only through vertical organisation. But does this level of abuse mean that the ability of vertical organisation to establish cooperation is fundamentally limited? Is this abuse the price we have to pay for the benefits of cooperation that can be produced only by vertical organisation? Or is it simply that current human organisation and its obvious flaws should be seen as part of an evolutionary progression in which the flaws will eventually be overcome? Is this just an evolutionary stage we are going through? And if so, how will the flaws be overcome?" - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/5.htm#_ednref1:~:text=If%20it%20is%20not,the%20flaws%20be%20overcome%3F)

> "Competition between human societies is no longer strong enough or incessant enough to align the interests of human rulers and governments with those of their citizens. When human groups were small and numerous, competition was strong and continual. But as human societies grew larger and fewer, competition between them has decreased. We will see that in the absence of strong and continual competition, the key to the evolution of cooperative human societies is the discovery of new organisational structures. These must align the interests of the ruler or government with those of the members of the society. When this is achieved, a government driven purely by self-interest will manage in the interests of the society. Abuse and exploitation will end, and the benefits of cooperation can be fully exploited." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/5.htm#_ednref1:~:text=competition%20between%20human,be%20fully%20exploited.)

████████████████████████████████████████████████
# Chapter 6. The Evolution of Management
████████████████████████████████████████████████

> "Eventually, the evolutionary success of a manager will depend totally on its ability to manage the group that it controls. It will have no evolutionary future outside the group it manages. The success of the manager will depend totally on the success of the organisation. The manager will capture all the effects on the organisation of its actions, good and bad, and will therefore treat the organisation as it would treat itself. The self-interested manager will pursue the interests of the organisation as a whole. The group and the manager will form an organisation that is a single, united evolutionary entity." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/6.htm#:~:text=Eventually%2C%20the%20evolutionary,united%20evolutionary%20entity.)

> "When individuals that have the ability to control others emerge in a population, they will initially use their power in ways that often damage the interests of others. But once they discover ways to use their power to harvest a stream of benefits from others, it will increasingly be in their interests to protect and nurture a group of individuals that can provide these benefits." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/6.htm#:~:text=when%20individuals%20that,provide%20these%20benefits.)

> "But the possibility of competition for the position of ruler would arise again whenever a ruler died. Other individuals could then compete to take over the position. Some might even hasten the death of the ruler to open up this possibility. The scope for this competition would be reduced if the number of people who were qualified to take the position of ruler were limited. For example, if only children of the existing ruler were permitted to become the ruler. This greatly reduced the numbers of individuals who had the supreme incentive to overthrow the ruler.
>
> However, this method of controlling destructive competition has had limited success. History is full of examples of sons killing fathers, wives killing husbands, and brothers killing brothers in order to meet whatever restrictive criteria were set to determine who could take the position of ruler. The result has been as destructive to the proper management of these human societies as competition between RNA molecules was to the interests of proto cells.
>
> The solution was the same as in cells: the ruler had to manage the organisation to establish processes and structures that could control even rulers. Laws and methods of enforcing laws had to be established that could prevent rulers and those who could become rulers from seriously damaging the society. The effect of these laws and enforcement processes would be to move toward realigning the interests of rulers and potential rulers with the interests of the society as a whole. As we shall see, the establishment of controls over rulers (including governments) so that their interests were aligned more closely with the community has been very important in the evolution of human society, and will continue to be so." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/6.htm#:~:text=But%20the%20possibility,%5B14%5D.)

> "But without strong competition, the interests of the governor and the governed would not be so closely aligned. If the kingdom had no external threats, there would be no immediate cost if, for example, the ruler and his allies over-taxed the community. The survival of the kingdom would not be threatened immediately if the ruler overindulged himself and his allies with material and psychological benefits at the expense of the community. Although the ruler would still be heavily dependent on the community and their interests would still overlap somewhat, the ruler could get away with over-exploiting the community." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/6.htm#:~:text=But%20without%20strong,exploiting%20the%20community.)

> "What controls will ensure that a self-interested manager will act only in the interests of the society as a whole? This challenge is of critical importance." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/6.htm#:~:text=What%20controls%20will%20ensure%20that%20a%20self%2Dinterested%20manager%20will%20act%20only%20in%20the%20interests%20of%20the%20society%20as%20a%20whole%3F%20This%20challenge%20is%20of%20critical%20importance.)

> "History is overflowing with examples in which revolts and revolutions have failed to devise controls that meet this challenge. Instead they produced new rulers whose self-interest lay in exactly the same direction as the overthrown rulers. The pigs took over the farm, and eventually become indistinguishable from the farmers they replaced.
>
> However, there have also been examples in which new controls have been put in place that help to better align the interests of the governors and the governed. The democratic process is a clear example. In theory at least, democracy allows the governors to be overthrown by popular vote if they do not serve the interests of the society." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/6.htm#:~:text=History%20is%20overflowing,of%20the%20society.)

> "For continued evolutionary success, human society must be able to establish cooperation wherever and whenever it is beneficial to society as a whole. As we have seen, this can be achieved if a system of government aligns the interests of the individual members of society with those of the society as a whole. This will ensure that individuals who pursue their own interests will pursue the interests of the society. But government will do this only if the interests of the government are completely aligned with those of the society. When this condition is met, governments that pursue their own interests will also pursue the interests of the society. They will use their power to organise cooperation that serves the interests of the society.
>
> Where the interests of government are not aligned in this way, the society will not be able to fully exploit the benefits of cooperation to satisfy the needs of its members. This would be the case for a society in which the destiny of governments is controlled by the citizens who have the greatest economic power. In such a society, it would be in the interests of the wealthy to have the government manage the society in their interests rather than in the interests of the society as a whole. Many believe that our current social systems are in fact organised in this way: in a 1992 survey of US citizens, 80 per cent said that they thought their country was run for the rich. But our present democratic governments and the economically powerful tend to disagree with this. They generally argue that there is little need to radically change our social systems. They are vigorous supporters of the status quo. They claim that our current democratic systems are, in the broad, the best available forms of government. Democratic government is as good as it gets.
>
> But throughout history, rulers, governments and those who benefit most from them have always extolled the virtues of the particular form of government that provided them with their wealth, power and self-esteem. They often claim that their system has been designed in accordance with God’s will, or even that they themselves are gods, or at least that they have God on their side. And they commonly promote ideologies, myths and world views that support their system as the ultimate form of government, as the culmination of human history, and as the best and fairest method of organising human society. Any who push for alternative forms of government and who are sufficiently successful to threaten the established order have commonly been killed, jailed, beaten, or treated as criminals. They are often branded as mentally unstable, idiots, sexual deviants, ignorant and unscientific, or as being in the pay of enemy governments.
>
> There are no examples from history of governments that have taken an evolutionary approach to systems of governance. Governments have never seriously promoted the view that they and their systems are temporary, merely a transitory step along the way to new and better forms of governance. Universally they have failed to demand that society should continually be searching for improvements in government, and should establish systems of government that are designed to evolve and to be better at evolving.
>
> All this is exactly what would be expected of managers who have been constructed by evolution to pursue their own interests, and who have not been subject to controls that align their interests with those of the organisation they manage.
>
> As we will see in detail, our current systems of government fail to meet the evolutionary ideal. Democratic processes are not sufficient to completely align the interests of the governors with the governed. As a result, even highly democratic human societies do not harness the benefits of cooperation in the interests of society as a whole. A major challenge for humans in the future is therefore to devise forms of organisation that overcome this limitation, and that are more likely to be successful in evolutionary terms. Even though our societies may not be subject to strong and continual competition at present, we must organise our societies cooperatively so that they will be competitive in future evolution. If evolution on this planet is to continue to progress by exploiting more of the potential benefits of cooperation, we must meet this challenge successfully." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/6.htm#:~:text=For%20continued%20evolutionary,this%20challenge%20successfully.)

████████████████████████████████████████████████
# Chapter 7. Internal Management
████████████████████████████████████████████████

> "A tribe could be managed by a set of hard-wired predispositions that could reproduce itself in most of the members of the group, and cause them to expel any remaining members who did not appear to contain the hard wiring. I will refer to such a manager as a distributed internal manager: the management is internal to the individuals being managed, and is distributed in the sense that it is contained in each of the members of the group.
>
> A distributed internal manager is formed of a set of hard-wired predispositions that are reproduced in each of the members of a group of organisms. As we have seen, the predispositions can be genetic, or can be strong moral or other beliefs that are learnt during the life of the organism. As we shall see, internal managers are established by genes in insect societies and in the societies of cells that are multicellular organisms. And they were established by systems of moral and religious beliefs as well as genetic predispositions in the early tribal societies that preceded modern human societies managed by external rulers.
>
> A distributed internal manager clearly has the potential to organise a group cooperatively. It can hard wire individuals so that they participate directly in cooperation, provide resources to maintain group activities, refrain from cheating, theft and free riding, and punish individuals who undermine cooperation. In this way it can cause individuals to act in the interests of the group as a whole, and to treat others in the group as self. An internal manager can organise cooperation directly by hard wiring specific cooperative behaviours in individuals. Or it can do it indirectly by controlling exchanges between individuals so that individuals capture the benefits of their cooperative acts on others. For example, individuals might be hard wired so that they do not cheat in reciprocal cooperative exchanges. This would enable the reciprocal altruism mechanism to operate successfully." - [source](http://users.tpg.com.au/users/jes999/7.htm#:~:text=a%20tribe%20could,to%20operate%20successfully.)








Distributed internal management that is unable to suppress competition from other managers within the organisation will not be effective at organising cooperation. It will not be able to capture all the benefits of cooperation. An example is the process of genetical kin selection that we considered earlier. Kin selection begins to operate when an individual contains a genetic manager that predisposes it to cooperate with others. The normal process of reproduction will produce related individuals who also contain the same manager. If it is to be successful, the manager must capture the benefits of the cooperation it produces. So evolution will favour genetic managers that organise individuals to direct their cooperation only towards others who contain copies of itself. As we have seen, managers can use relatedness to target their cooperation in this way[8]. But, because relatedness is not a perfect indicator of a shared manager, a manager will not capture all the benefits of the cooperation it organises. Some of the benefits will leak to individuals who do not include the manager. The manager will not find it profitable to organise some forms of cooperation even though it provides net benefits. As a result, the ability of genetical kin selection to organise cooperation is limited.

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

> "" - [source]()

