# Shortcomings of Headjack

<!-- TODO: move page about headjack cons to the 3rd big chapter -->

- State growth - Headjack keeps a lot of the history in its materialized state as ranges for historic querying & to generate proofs - not just the "current view" which itself constantly grows. However, most of this is compact integers (block ranges for authorization, nonce mappings, etc.) and growth will not be extremely high. [Bluesky](others_list.md#bluesky) similarly wants to be able to prove the authenticity of old content and has a transparency log but it will be much less compact.

- Social graphs & DMs are facilitated by [IDMs](IDM.md) which resemble [Farcaster](others_list.md#farcaster)'s managed hosts and [Bluesky](others_list.md#bluesky)'s Personal Data Servers - a centralization point with some trust assumptions and potential for data breaches. However, this is the best tradeoff that would allow for true mass adoption and is still a massive improvement to the status quo. A big failure scenario is if an IDM that manages millions of accounts goes rogue or shuts down:
    - Those that have not bound a keypair to their accounts will effectively be stuck.
    - The chain could get congested by those who have keypairs and suddenly all at once start submitting on-chain transactions directly to move to another IDM but that problem can be alleviated through [signature aggregation](https://ethresear.ch/t/an-off-chain-bls-aggregation-scheme-which-might-reduce-the-casper-finalization-to-1-min/5427) if the signed payload is the same like for example if a big chunk of them move from IDM `666` to IDM `42` specifically.
        - If they haven't exported their off-chain data managed by their previous IDM it could be lost - social graph, DMs, preferences, etc.
        - However, these problems (loss from a "trusted" service going down and network congestion on rare events) will be shared by any solution that has "trusted" services that are required to reach any meaningful scale. Some users could run their own version of an IDM for their private data but they'll have to pay for more bytes on-chain which is not something that everyone could be doing at once.

- Updates & deletes to content may not be applied/displayed properly in all interfaces - there will always be those that don't honor edits or [purge requests](https://github.com/bluesky-social/adx/blob/main/architecture.md#purge-requests-hard-removal). However, this is a problem with almost any decentralized protocol and most established interfaces will be honoring these types of messages or else people will simply move to different ones. In the end, this will not be an issue on any meaningful scale as social forces will solve it.

- Data pointed to by a URI is not by itself [self-authenticating](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-authenticating_document) - it needs accompanying cryptographic Merkle proofs that only full blockchain nodes can generate. However, no solution provides fully self-authenticating content as keypairs might have changed - there will always be a need to consult with a [logically centralized](https://medium.com/@VitalikButerin/the-meaning-of-decentralization-a0c92b76a274) entity. Also archiving & bookmarking services (or fully self-contained articles/books with no external dependencies) that don't want to rely on repetitive requests to the blockchain in the future may request these proofs initially and store them along with the data.
